BIG DATA ANALYTICS  
UNIT -6 
Spark Streaming : Stream Processing Fundamentals, Structured 
Streaming  basics - Core Concepts, Structured Streaming  in Action, 
Transformations on Streams, Input and Output(Kafka)  
 
Spark Streaming :  
 Spark Streaming is an extension of the core Spark API that enables 
scalable, high -throughput, fault -tolerant stream processing of live 
data streams.  
 Data can be ingested from many sources like Kafka, Kinesis, or 
TCP sockets, and can be processed using comp lex algorithms 
expressed with high -level functions 
like map, reduc e, join and windo w.  
 Finally, processed data can be pushed out to file systems , 
databases, and live dashboards.  
 In fact,  we can apply Spark’s  machine learning  and graph 
processing  algorithms on data streams . 
 

 
 Internally, it works as follows.  
 Spark Streaming receives live input data streams and divides the 
data into batches, which are then processed by the Spark engine 
to generate the final stream of results in batches . 
 
 Spark Streaming provides a high -level abstraction 
called  discretized strea m or DStrea m, which represents a 
continuous stream of data.  
 DStreams can be created either from input data streams from 
sources such as Kafka, a nd Kinesis, or by applying high -level 
operations on other DStreams.  
 Internally, a DStream is represented as a sequence of  RDDs . 
First, we import the names of the Spark Streaming classes and some 
implicit conversions from StreamingContext into our environment in 
order to add useful methods to other classes we need (like 
DStream).  StreamingContext  is the main entry point for all streaming 
functionalit y 
import  org.apache.spark._  
import  org.apache.spark.streaming._  
import  org.apache.spark.streaming.StreamingContext._  // not 
necessary since Spark 1.3  

 
// Create a local StreamingContext with two working thread and batch 
interval of 1 second.  
// The master requires 2 cores to prevent a starvation scenario.  
 
val conf = new 
SparkConf ().setMaster ("local[2]" ).setAppName ("NetworkWordCount"
) 
val ssc = new StreamingContext (conf, Seconds (1)) 
 Using this context, we can create a DStream that represents 
streaming data from a TCP source, specified as hostname 
(e.g. localhost ) and port (e.g.  9999 ). 
// Create a DStream that will connect to hostname:port, like 
localhost:9999  
val lines  = ssc.socketTextStream ("localhost" , 9999 ) 
 This lines  DStream represents the stream of data that will be 
received from the data server. Each record in this DStream is a line 
of text. Next, we want to split the lines by space characters into 
words.  
// Split each line into words  
val words  = lines .flatMap (_.split(" ")) 
 flatMap  is a one -to-many DStream operation that creates a new 
DStream by generating multiple new records from each record in 
the source DStream.  
 In this case, each line will be split into multiple words and the 
stream of words is represented as the  words  DStream  
Stream Processing Fundamentals:  
 Stream processing is a data management technique that involves 
ingesting a continuous  data stream  to quickly analyze, filter, 
transform or  enhance the data in re al time.  
 Once processed, the data is passed off to an application, data store 
or another stream processing engine.  
 Stream processing services and architectures are growing in 
popula rity because they allow enterprises to combine data feed 
from various sources.   
 Sources can include transactions, stock feeds, website analytics, 
connected devices, operational databases, weather reports and 
other commercial services.  
 The core ideas behind  stream processing have been around for 
decades but are getting easier to implement with various open 
source tools and cloud services.  
How does stream processing work:  
 Stream processing architectures help simplify the data 
management tasks required to consume, process and publish the 
data securely and reliably.  
 Stream processing starts by ingesting data from a publish -subscribe 
service, performs an action on it and then publishes the results 
back to the publish -subscribe service or another data store.  
 These actions can include processes such as analyzing, filtering, 
transforming, combining or cleaning data.  
 Stream processing commonly connotes the notion of  real-time 
analytics , which is a relative term.   
 The stream processing engine organizes data events arriving in 
short batches and presents them to other applications as a 
continuous feed.  
 This simplifies the logic for application developers combining and 
recombining data from various sources and from different time 
scales . 
 
 
Need of stream processing :  
Stream processing is needed to:  
 Develop adaptive and responsive applications  
 Help enterprises improve real -time bus iness analytics  
 Facilitate faster decisions  
 Accelerate decision -making  
 Improve decision -making with increased context  
 Improve the user experience  

 Create new applications that use a wider variety of data sources  
 
Common  stream processing use cases  include:  
 Fraud detection  
 Detecting anomalous events  
 Tuning business application features  
 Managing location data  
 Personalizing customer  experience  
 Stock market trading  
 Analyzing and responding to IT infrastructure events  
 Predictive analytics  
 
Stream processing frameworks : 
 Spark, Flink and Kafka Streams are the most common open source 
stream processing frameworks.  
  In addition, all the primary cloud services also have native 
services that  simplify stream processing development on their 
respective platforms, such as Amazon Kinesis, Azure Stream 
Analytics and Google Cloud Dataflow.  
 These often go hand in hand with other publish -subscribe 
frameworks used for connecting applications and data s tores.  
For example,  
 Apache Kafka  is a popular open source publish -subscribe 
framework that simplifies integrating data across multiple 
applications.  
 Apache Kafka Streams is a stream processing library for creating 
applications that ingest data from Kafka, process it and then 
publish the results back to Kafka as a new data source for other 
applications to consume.  
Stream Processing Use Cases : 
Notifications and alerting : 
 Probably the most obvious st reaming use case involves 
notifications and alerting. Given some  series of events, a 
notification or alert should be triggered if some sort of event or 
series of  events occurs.  
 This doesn’t necessarily imply autonomous or preprogrammed 
decision making;  alerting can also be used to notify a human 
counterpart of some action that needs to be taken.  
 An example might be driving an alert to an employee at a 
fulfillment center that they need to get a  certain item from a 
location in the warehouse and ship it to a c ustomer. In either case, 
the notification needs to happen quickly.  
 
Incremental ETL : 
 One of the most common streaming applications is to reduce the 
latency companies must endure  while retreiving information into a 
data warehouse —in short, “my batch job, but streaming.”  
 Spark  batch jobs are often used for Extract, Transform, and Load 
(ETL) workloads that turn raw  data into a structured format like 
Parquet to enable efficient queries.  
 Using Structured Streaming, these  jobs can incorporate new data 
within seconds, enabling users  to query it faster downstream.  
 In this use case, it is critical that data is processed exactly once and 
in a fault -tolerant manner: we  don’t want to lose any input data 
before it makes it to the warehouse, and we don’t want to load  the 
same data twice.  
  Moreover, the streaming system needs to make updates to the data  
warehouse transactionally so as not to confuse the queries running 
on it with partially written  data 
 
 
Update data to serve in real time : 
 Streaming systems are frequently used to compute data that gets 
served interactively by anoth er application.  
 For example, a web analytics product such as Google Analytics 
might continuously  track the number of visits to each page, and use 
a streaming system to keep these counts up to  date.  
 When users interact with the product’s UI, this web applic ation 
queries the latest counts.  Supporting this use case requires that the 
streaming system can perform incremental updates to a  key–value 
store (or other serving system) as a sync, and often also that these 
updates are  transactional , as in the ETL case, to avoid corrupting 
the data in the application.  
 
Real -time decision making : 
 Real-time decision making on a streaming system involves 
analyzing new inputs and responding  to them automatically using 
business logic.  
 An example use case would be a bank that wants to  automatically 
verify whether a new transaction on a customer’s credit card 
represents fraud  based on their recent history, and deny the 
transaction if the charge is determined fradulent.  
  This decision needs to be made in real -time while processing each 
transaction, so develope rs could  implement this business logic in a 
streaming system and run it against the stream of transactions.  
 This type of application will likely need to maintain a significant 
amount of state about each user  to track their current spending 
patterns, and au tomatically compare this state against each new  
transaction.  
 
Online machine learning : 
 A close derivative of the real -time decision -making use case is 
online machine learning. In this  scenario, you might want to train a 
model on a combination of streaming and historical data from  
multiple users.  
 An example might be more sophisticated than the aforementioned 
credit card  transaction use case: rather than reacting with 
hardcoded rules based on one customer’s behavior,  the company 
may want to continuously update a model from all customer s’ 
behavior and test  each transaction against it.  
 This is the most challenging use case of the bunch for stream  
processing systems because it requires aggregation across multiple 
customers, joins against static  datasets, integration with machine 
learning l ibraries, and low -latency response times.  
 
 
Structured Streaming Basics : 
 Structured Streaming, is a stream processing  framework built on 
the Spark SQL engine.  
 Rather than introducing a separate API, Structured  Streaming  uses 
the existing structured APIs in Spark (DataFrames, Datasets, and  
SQL), meaning  that all the operations you are familiar with there 
are supported.  
 Structured Streaming engine will take care of running  your query 
incrementally and continuously as new da ta arrives into the 
system.  
 These logical  instructions for the computation are then executed 
using the same Catalyst engine  including query optimization, code 
generation, etc.  
 Structured Streaming includes a number of features  specifically for 
streaming. For instance, Structured Streaming ensures end -to-end, 
exactly -once  processing as well as fault -tolerance through 
checkpointing and write -ahead logs.  
 The main idea behind Struc tured Streaming is to treat a stream of 
data as a table to which data is  continuously appended.  
  The job then periodically checks for new input data, process it, 
updates  some internal state located in a state store if needed, and 
updates its result.  
 Internal ly, Structured Streaming will automatically figure out how 
to “incrementalize”  your query, i.e., update its result efficiently 
whenever new data arrives, and will run it in a fault tolerant  
fashion.  
 
Core Concepts : 
           Transformations and Actions  
 Structured Streami ng maintains the same concept of 
transformations and actions that we have  seen . 
 The transformations available in Structured Streaming are, with a 
few restrictions, the exact same transformations . 
 The restrictions  usually  involve some types of queries that the 
engine cannot incrementalize yet, although some of the  limitations 
are being lifted in new versions of Spark.  
 There is generally only one action available  in Structured 
Streaming: that of starting a stream, w hich will then run 
continuously and output  
results.  
 
 
Input Sources : 
 Structured Streaming supports several input sources  for reading in 
a streaming fashion. As of  Spark 2.2, the supported input sources 
are as follows:  
 Apache Kafka 0.10  

 Files on a distributed f ile system like HDFS or S3 (Spark will 
continuously read new  files in a directory)  
 
Sinks : 
 Just as sources allow you to get data into Structured Streaming, 
sinks specify the destination for  the result set of that stream. Sinks 
and the execution engine are also responsible for reliably  tracking 
the exact progress of data processing.  
 Here are the supported output sinks as of Spark  2.2: 
 Apache Kafka 0.10  
 Almost any file format  
 A foreach sink for running arbitary computation on the output 
records  
 A console sink for testing  
 A memory sink for debugging  
 
 
Output Modes : 
 We define an output mode , similar to how we define output modes 
in the static  Structured APIs.   
 The supported output modes are as follows:  
  Append (only add new records to the output sink)  
 Update (update changed records in place)  
 Complete (rewrite the full output)  
 
 
Triggers : 
 Triggers define when data is output —that is,  when Structured 
Streaming should check for new in put data and update its result.  
 By default, Structured Streaming will look for new input records as 
soon as it has finished processing the last  group of input data, 
giving the lowest latency possible for new results. However, this 
behavior  can lead to writing many small output files when the sink 
is a set of files.  
 Thus, Spark also  supports tr iggers based on processing time (only 
look for new data at a fixed interval).  
 
Event -Time Processing : 
 Structured Streaming also has support for event -time processing 
(i.e., processing data based on  timestamps included in the record 
that may arrive out of order).  
 
Event -time data : 
 Event -time means time fields that are embedded in your data.  
 This means that rather than  processing data according to the time it 
reaches your system, you process it acc ording to the time  that it 
was generated, even if records arrive out of order at the streaming 
application due to slow  uploads or network delays.  
  Expressing event -time processing is simple in Structured 
Streaming.  
 
 
Transformations on Streams:  
 Through this   Apache  Spark  Transformation Operations we 
will learn about various Apache Spark streaming 
transformation operations with example being use d. 
 Streaming operations like Spark Map operati on, flatmap 
operation, Spark filter operation, count operation, Spark 
ReduceByKey operation, Spark CountByValue operation 
with example and Spark UpdateStateByKey operation with 
example that will help in the Spark jobs . 
 
             
 
a. map()  
 Map function in Spark passes each element of the source DStream 
through a function and returns a new DStream.  
 
 Spark map() example : 
[php]val conf = new SparkConf().setMaster(“local[2]”) 
.setAppName(“MapOpTest”)  
val ssc = new StreamingContext(conf , Seconds(1)) val words = 
ssc.socketTextStream(“localhost”, 9999)  
val ans = words.map { word => (“hello” ,word ) } // map hello 
with eac h line  
ans.print()  
ssc.start() // Start the computation  
ssc.awaitTermination() // Wait for termination  
}[/php]  
 
 

b. flatMap()  
 FlatMap function in Spark is similar to Spark map function, but in 
flatmap, input item can be mapped to 0 or more output items.  
 This creates  difference  between  map and flatmap  operations  in 
spark.  
 
 Spark  FlatMap  Example  
[php]val lines = ssc.socketTextStream(“localhost”, 9999)  
val words = lines.flatMap(_.split(” “)) // for each line it split the 
words by space  
val pairs = words.map(word => (word, 1))  
val wordCounts = pairs.reduceByKey(_ + _)  
wordCounts.print()[/php]  
 
 
c. filter() : 
 Filter function in Apache Spark returns selects only those re cords 
of the source DStream on which func returns true and returns a 
new DStream of those records.  
 
 Spark  Filter  function  example  
[php]val lines = ssc.socketTextStream(“localhost”, 9999)  
val words = lines.flatMap(_.split(” “))  
val output = words.filter { wo rd => word.startsWith(“s”) } // filter 
the words starts with letter“s”  
output.print()[/php]  
 
 
d. reduceByKey(func, [numTasks])  
 When called on a DStream of (K, V) pairs, ReduceByKey function 
in Spark returns a new DStream of (K, V) pairs where the values 
for each key are aggregated using the given reduce function.  
 
 Spark  reduceByKey  example  
[php]val lines = ssc.socketTextStream(“loc alhost”, 9999)  
val words = lines.flatMap(_.split(” “))  
val pairs = words.map(word => (word, 1))  
val wordCounts = pairs.reduceByKey(_ + _)  
wordCounts.print()[/php]  
 
e. countByValue()  
 CountByValue function in Spark is called on a DStream of 
elements of type  K and it returns a new DStream of (K, Long) 
pairs where the value of each key is its frequency in each  Spark  
RDD  of the source DStream.  
 
 Spark  CountByValue  function  example  
[php]val line = ssc.socketTextStream(“localhost”, 9999)  
val words = line.flatMap(_.split(” “))  
words.countByValue().print()[/php]  
 
 
Kafka : 
 Apache Kafka is a publish -subscribe messaging system.  
  A messaging system let you send messages between pr ocesses, 
applications, and servers.  
 Broadly Speaking, Apache Ka fka is a software where topics  can 
be defined and further processed.  
 Applications may connect to this system and transfer a message 
onto the topic.  
 A message can i nclude any kind of information ,from any event 
on your Personal blog or can be a very simple text message that 
would trigger any other event . 
 Kafka is suitable for both offline and online message consumption.  
 Kafka messages are persisted on the disk and replicated within the 
cluster to prevent data loss.  
 Kafka is built on top of the ZooKeeper synchronization service. It 
integrates very well with Apache Storm and Spark for real -time 
streaming data analysis  
 
Publish -Subscribe Messaging System  
 In the Publish -Subscribe system, message producers are called 
publish ers and message consumers are called subscribers.  
 A real -life example is Dish TV, which publishes different channels 
like sports, movies, music, etc., and anyone can subscribe to their 
own set of channels and get them whenever their subscribed 
channels are  available.  

 
 
 A Kafka cluster usually consists of one or more servers (called as 
kafka brokers), which are running Kafka over 
them.  Producer s are processes that publish data (push messages 
over trigger) into Kafka topics within the specified broker . 
 
 The basic unit  of data in Kafka is a message   
  Message is sometimes used interchang eably with record  
 Produc ers write messages to Brokers  
 Consumers read messages from Brokers  

 
 
Consumers  and consumer  groups  : Consumers can always read 
messages starting from a specific offset and are allowed to read from 
any offset point they choose in between. This allows consumers to join 
the cluster at any point in time.This makes functioning and working 
really smooth . 
Partitions  allow  you to parallelise  a topic  by splitting  the data  in a 
particular  topic  across  multiple  brokers.  

 
 
 
Benefits : 
Following are a few benefits of Kafka −  
 Reliab ility − Kafka is distributed, partitioned, replicated and fault 
tolerance.  
 Scalability  − Kafka messaging system scales easily without down 
time.  
 Durability  − Kafka uses  Distributed commit lo g which means 
messages persists on disk as fast as possible, henc e it is durable.  
 Performance  − Kafka has high throughput for both publishing and 
subscribing messages. It maintains stable performance even many 
TB of messages are stored.  
 
 
Real time Applications : 
 Twitter : Registered users can read and post tweets, but 
unregistered users can only read tweets. Twitter uses Storm -
Kafka as a part of their stream processing infrastructure.  

 LinkedIn : Apache Kafka is used at LinkedIn for activity stream 
data and operational metr ics. Kafka messaging system helps 
LinkedIn with various products like LinkedIn Newsfeed, 
LinkedIn Today for online message consumption and in addition 
to offline analytics systems like Hadoop.  
 Netflix : Netflix is an American multinational provider of on -
demand Internet streaming media. Netflix uses Kafka for real -
time monitoring and event processing.  
 Box: At Box, Kafka is used for the production analytics pipeline 
& real time monitoring infrastructure.  
 
 
For your Reference:  
https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/streaming -programming -
guide.html  
