BIG DATA ANALYTICS  
UNIT -III 
SQOOP : Introduction to SQOOP,  SQOOP  Imports:  From  Database to HDFS/Hive , 
SQOOP Exports :From HDFS/Hive to Database , Incremental imports  
NoSQL & HBase : Overview , HBase Architecture , CRUD Operations  
 
Introduction to SQOOP  : 
• When Big Data storages and analyzers such as MapReduce, Hive, HBase, Cassandra, Pig, 
etc. of the Hadoop ecosystem came into picture, they required a tool to interact with the 
relational database servers for importing and exporting the Big Data residing in them. The 
problems  administrators encountered using Hadoop included : 
➢ Maintaining data consistency  
➢ Ensuring efficient utilization of resources  
➢ Loading bulk data to Hadoop was not possible  
➢ Loading data using scripts was slow  
• The solution was SQOOP . Using Sqoop in Hadoop helped to overcome all the challenges of 
the traditional approach and it could load bulk data from RDBMS to Hadoop with ease.   
• Here, Sqoop  occupies a place in the Hadoop ecosystem to provide feasible interaction 
between relational database server and Hadoop’s HDFS.  
• Sqoop  is a tool used to transfer bulk data between Relational Database Management systems 
to Hadoop and vice versa.  Two operations performed in Sqoop are Import & Export.  
 
SQL+HAD OOP  = SQOOP  
(First two letters in SQL & Last three letters in Had oop form SQOOP ). 
• Sqoop (“SQL -to-Hadoop”) is a straightforward command -line tool. It offers the 
following capabilities:  

➢ Generally,  helps to Import individual tables or entire databases to files in HDFS  
➢ Also can Generate Java classes to allow you to interact with your imported data  
➢ Moreover, it offers the ability to import from SQL databases straight into 
your Hive  data warehouse.  
 
SQOOP FEATURES:  
 
Sqoop  has several features, which makes it helpful in the Big Data world:   
1. Parallel Import/Export : Sqoop uses the YARN framework to import and export data. This 
provides fault tolerance on top of parallelism.  
2. Import Results of an SQL Query:  Sqoop enables us to i mport the results returned from an 
SQL query into HDFS.  
3. Connectors For All Major RDBMS Databases: Sqoop provides connectors for multiple 
RDBMSs, such as the MySQL and Microsoft SQL servers.  

4. Kerberos Security Integration : Sqoop supports the Kerberos computer  network 
authentication protocol, which enables nodes communication over an insecure network to 
authenticate users securely.  
5. Provides Full and Incremental Load :   
Incremental Load : Moreover, we can load parts of table whenever it is updated. 
 Since Sqoop  offers the facility of the incremental load.   
Full Load : It is one of the  important features of sqoop, in which we can load  the 
whole table by a single command in Sqoop. Also, by using  a single command  we 
can load all the tables from a data base.  
6.Load data directly into HIVE/HBase : 
Basically, for analysis, we can load data directly into  Apache  Hive.  Also, can dump  your data 
in HBase , which is a NoSQL database.  
7. Compression : By using deflate(gzip) algorithm with –compress argument, We can compress 
your data. Moreover, it is also possible by specifying –compression -codec argument. In 
addition,  we can  also load compressed table in  Apache Hive.  
Advantages of Sqoop :  
● With the help of Sqoop, we can perform transfer operations of data with a variety of 
structured data sto res like Oracle  etc.  
● Sqoop helps us to perform Extract, transform, and load  (ETL) operations in a very fast and 
cost-effective manner.  
● With the help of Sqoop, we can perform parallel processing of data which leads to fasten 
the overall process.  
● Sqoop uses the MapReduce mechanism for its operations which also supports fault 
tolerance.  
Disadvantages of Sqoop :  
● The failure occurs during the implementation of operation needed a special solution to handle 
the problem.  
● The Sqoop uses J DBC ( Java™ database connectivity  )connection to establish a connection 
with the relational database management system which is an in efficient way.  
● The performance of Sqoop export operation depends upon hardware configuration relational 
database management system.  
 
Sqoop Architecture:  
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure:  
➢ The client submits the import/ export command to import or export data  

➢  Sqoop fetches data from different databases. Here, we have an enterprise data warehouse, 
document -based systems, and a relational database. We have  a connector for each of these, 
connectors help to work with a range of accessible dat abases.  
➢ Multiple mappers perform map tasks to load the data on to HDFS.  
➢ Similarly, numerous map tasks will export the data from HDFS on to RDBMS using the 
Sqoop export command .  
SQOOP IMPORT :  
➢ Basically, a tool which imports individual tables from RDBMS to HDFS is what 
we call  Sqoop import tool . 
➢  The import tool imports individual tables from RDBMS to HDFS.  
➢ However, in HDFS we treat each row in a table as a record.  
➢ Each row in a table is treated as a record in HDFS.  
➢ All records are stored as text data in text files or as binary data in Sequence files.  
➢ It can import all tables, a single table, or a portio n of a table into HDFS.  
➢ In addition, in case of aggregations, we require reducing phase.  
➢ Howeve r, Sqoop does not perform any aggregations it just imports and exports 
the data. Also, on the basis of the number defined by the user, map job launch 
multiple mappers.  
➢ In addition, each mappe r task will be assigned with a part of data to be imported 
for Sqoop import.  
➢ Also, to get high -performance Sqoop distributes the input data among the mappers 
equally.   
➢ Afterwards, by  using JDBC each mapper creates the connection with the 
database. Also fetc hes the part of data assigned by Sqoop. Moreover, it writes it 
into HDFS or  Hive  or HBase  on the basis of arguments provided in the CLI.  
 
Wor king :  
➢ Sqoop import command helps in implementation of the operation.  
➢ In this example, a company’s data is present in the RDBMS. All this metadata is 
sent to the Sqoop import.  
➢ Scoop then performs an introspection of the database to gather metadata (primary 
key information).  
➢ It then submits a map -only job.  
➢ Sqoop divides the  input dataset into splits and uses individual map tasks to push 
the splits to HDFS.   
➢ Thus data is imported from RDBMS to Hadoop.  
 
 
 
Syntax  
The following syntax is used to import data into HDFS.  
$ sqoop import (generic -args)(import -args) 
$ sqoop -import (generic -args)(import -args) 
Example  
Let us take an example of three tables named as  emp, emp_add , and emp_contact , 
which are in a database called userdb  in a MySQL database server.  
The three tables and their data are as follows.  

 
 
 
Importing a Table  
Sqoop  tool ‘import’ is used to import table data from the table to the Hadoop file system 
as a text file or a binary file.  

The following command is used to import the  emp table from MySQL database server 
to HDFS.  
$ sqoop import  \ 
--connect jdbc :mysql ://localhost/userdb \ 
--username root \ 
--table emp --m 1 
 
To verify the imported data in HDFS, use the following command.  
 $ $HADOOP_HOME /bin/hadoop fs -cat /emp/part-m-* 
It shows you the  emp table data and fields are separated with comma (,).  
             
Importing into Target Directory  
• We can specify the target directory while importing table data into HDFS using 
the Sqoop import tool.  
• Following is the syntax to specify the target directory as option to the Sqoop 
import command.  
--target -dir <new or exist directory in HDFS > 
 
The following command is used to import  emp_add  table data into ‘/queryresult’ 
directory.  
 

           
The following command is used to verify the imported data in /queryresult directory 
form  emp_add  table.  
$ $HADOOP_HOME /bin/hadoop fs -cat /queryresult /part-m-* 
It will show you the emp_add table data with comma (,) separated fields.  
 
Import Subset of Table Data  
• We can import a subset of a table using the ‘where’ clause in Sqoop import tool. 
It executes the c orresponding SQL query in the respective database server and 
stores the result in a target directory in HDFS.  
The syntax for where clause is as follows.  
--where  <condition>  
 
• The following command is used to import a subset of  emp_add  table data. The 
subset query is to retrieve the employee id and address, who lives in Secunderabad 
city. 

 
The following command is used to verify the imported data in /wherequery 
directory from the  emp_add  table.  
$ $HADOOP_HOME /bin/hadoop fs -cat /wherequery /part-m-* 
It will show yo u the emp_add  table d ata with comma (,) separated fields.  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1. Sqoop Import – Common arguments  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Argument  Description  
–connect <jdbc -uri> Specify JDBC connect string  
–connection -manager 
<class -name>  Specify connection manager class to use  
–driver <class -name>  Manually specify JDBC driver class to use  
–hadoop -mapped -
home <dir>  Override $HADOOP_M APRED_HOME  
–help Print usage instructions  
–password -file Set path for a file containing the 
authentication password  
-P Read password from console  
–password 
<password>  Set auth entication password  
–username 
<username>  Set authentication username  
–verbose  Print more information while working  
–connection -param -
file <filename>  Optional properties file that provides 
connection parameters  
–relaxed -isolation  Set con nection transaction isolation to read 
uncommitted for the mappers.  
SQOOP EXPORT:  After  Sqoop Import , there is a tool which exports a set of files 
from  HDFS  back to RDBMS, that tool is what we call an Export Tool in  Apache 
Sqoop . 
Sqoop Export Syntax  
$ sqoop export (generic -args) (export -args)  
$ sqoop -export (generic -args) (export -args)  
 
• A tool which exports a set of files from HDFS back to an RDBMS is a  Sqoop 
Export tool .  
• Moreover, there are files  which behave as input to Sqoop which also contain 
records.   
• Those files what we call as rows in the table.  
Moreover, the job is mapped into map tasks,  while we submit our job, that b rings 
the chunk of data from  HDFS .  
• Then we export these chunks to a structured data destination.  
• Likewise, we receive the whole data at the destination by c ombining all these 
exported chunks of data.   
• However, in most of the cases, it is an RDBMS (MYSQL/Oracle/SQL Server).  
• The data which will be exported is processed into records b efore operation is completed.  
• The export of data is done with two steps, first is to examine the database for metadata and 
second step involves migration of data.  
• Sqoop then divides the input dataset into splits and uses individual map tasks to push the 
splits to RDBMS.   
 
 
The following command is used to export the table data (which is in  emp_data  file on 
HDFS) to the employee table in db database of Mysql database server.  
$ sqoop export  \ 
--connect jdbc :mysql ://localhost/db \ 
--username root \ 
--table employee \  
--export -dir /emp/emp_data  
The following command is used to verify the table in mysql command line.  
mysql >select  * from  employee ; 
If the given data is stored successfully, then you can find the following table of given 
employee data.  
 
 

+------ +-------------- +------------- +------------ ------- +-------- + 
| Id   | Name         | Designation | Salary            | Dept   |  
+------ +-------------- +------------- +------------------- +-------- + 
| 1201 | gopal        | manager     | 50000             | TP     |  
| 1202 | manisha      | preader     |  50000             | TP     |  
| 1203 | kalil        | php dev     | 30000             | AC     |  
| 1204 | prasanth     | php dev     | 30000             | AC     |  
| 1205 | kranthi      | admin       | 20000             | TP     |  
| 1206 | satish p     | g rp des     | 20000             | GR     |  
+------ +-------------- +------------- +------------------- +-------- + 
 
 
INCREMENTAL IMPORTS : 
Incremental import is a technique that imports only the newly added rows in a table.  It 
is required to add ‘incremental’, ‘check -column’, and ‘last -value’ options to perform 
the incremental import.  
Table 5. Sqoop Import – Incremental import arguments  
Argument  Description  
–check -column (col)  Specifies the column to be examin ed when 
determining which rows to import. (the 
column should not be of type 
CHAR/NCHAR/VARCHAR/V ARNCHAR/ 
LONGVARCHAR/LONGNV ARCHAR)  
–incremental (mode)  Specifies how Sqoop determines which rows 
are new. Legal values for mode include 
append and lastmodified.  
–last-value (value)  Specifies the maximum value of the check 
column from the previous import.  
The following syntax is used for the incremental option in Sqoop import command.  
--incremental <mode>  
--check -column <column name > 
--last value  <last check column value > 
➢ Incremental Imports are  classified into two types:  
1. --Incremental Append  
2. --Incremental Lastmodified  
 
General  Syntax  for Importing  data:  
 
$ sqoop  import   
--connect  jdbc:mysql ://localhost:3306/<database>  
--username  <username>  
                              --password  <password>  
--table  <tablename>  
--target -dir<targert -dir> 
                               --Incremental  <mode>  
                               --check -column  <id>  
                               --last-value  <value>  
 
--Incremental Append :  
➢ It fetches the newly added rows from table and import to HDFS.  
➢ It doesn’t fetch  the updated rows  from the table.  
➢ so these four properties we will have to co nsider for inserting new records  
➢ -append \ 
➢ --check-column <primary  key> \ 
➢ --incremental  append \ 
➢ --last-value <Last Value of primary key which sqoop job has 
inserted  in last run>  
Eg: Let us assume the newly added data into  emp table is as follows −  
1206, satish  p, grp des, 20000, GR  
The following command is used to perform the incremental import in the  emp table.  
 
$ sqoop import  \ 
--connect jdbc :mysql ://localhost/userdb \ 
--username root \ 
--table emp \ 
--m 1 \ 
--incremental append \ 
--check -column id \ 
-last value  1205  
 
The following command is used to verify the imported data from  emp table to HDFS 
emp/ directory.  
 
$ $HADOOP_HOME /bin/hadoop fs -cat /emp/part-m-* 
It shows you the  emp table data with comma (,) separated fields.  
             
--Incremental Lastmodified :  
➢ It Fetches the modified or updated rows from table and import to HDFS.  
➢ It doesn’t import any new added record in the table.  
➢ Taking the below illustration forward we will update the salary for employee id “1 203” 
from “3 0000” to  “60000”, has updated (so lastmodified) recently in Emp  table which we 
want to import in HDFS.  
➢ Emp id    1203 , Kalil , PhP dev , 60000, AC 
➢  eg: | Emp id | Name|Desg|Sal|Dept  | 

 
| 1203 | Kalil|Php dev|60000|AC  |  
 
Syntax:        
 sqoop import \  
--connect jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/db  \  
--username  root -P \  
--table customer  \  
--target-dir /user/hive/warehouse/<your  db>/<table>  \ 
  --append 
--check-column custid \ 
--incremental  lastmodified  \ 
--last-value <value>    
 
 
Introduction to  NoSQL:  
 
➢ NoSQL is a type of database management system (DBMS) that is designed to 
handle and store large volumes of unstructured and semi -structured data . 
➢ NoSQL  stands   for     Non-Relational   Database   Management   System,   or   
NoSQL database  stands  for “Not Only  SQL”.  
➢ NoSQL Database is a non -relational Data Management System, that does not 
require a  fixed  schema.  
➢ It avoids  joins,  and is easy to scale.  
➢ The major  purpose  of using  a NoSQL  database  is for distributed  data stores  with 
humongous  data storage  needs.  
➢ NoSQL is  used for Big data and  real-time web apps.  For example,  companies  like 
Twitter,  Facebook  and Google  collect  terabytes  of user data every single day.  
➢ Traditional RDBMS uses SQL syntax to store and retrieve data , Instead, a 
NoSQL  database system encompasses a wide range of database technologies that 
can store semi - structured,  unstructured  data.  
 
 
 
 
 
Why  NoSQL?  
 
➢ The concept  of NoSQL databases became popular  with Internet  giants  like 
Google,  Facebook, Amazon, etc. who deal with huge volumes of data. 
The system response time  becomes  slow when  we use RDBMS  for 
massive  volumes of  data.  
➢ To resolve this problem,  we could “ scale up” our systems by upgrading 
our existing  hardware(i.e,  by increasing size of  RAM,  HDD,  but this 
process  is expensive.  
➢ The alternative for this issue is to distribute database load on multiple 
hosts whenever the  load increases.  This method  is known  as “scaling  out.”  
 
 
 
 
Brief  History  of NoSQL  Databases:  
➢ In the year 1998 - Carlo  Strozzi  used the term NoSQL  for his 
lightweight,  open -source  relational  database  
➢ In the year 2000 - Graph  database  Neo4j  is launched  
➢ In the year 2004 - Google  BigTable  is launched  
➢ In the year 2005 - CouchDB  is launched  
➢ In the year 2007 - The research  paper  on Amazon  Dynamo  is released  
➢ In the year 2008 - Facebooks  open  sources  the Cassandra  project  
➢ In the year 2009 - The term  NoSQL  was reintroduced  
 
 

Features  of NoSQL:  
Non-relational  
➢ NoSQL  databases  never  follow  the relational  model  
➢ Never  provide  tables  with flat fixed -column  records  
➢ Doesn’t  require  object -relational  mapping  and data normalization  
 
Schema -free 
➢ NoSQL  databases  are either  schema -free or have  relaxed  schemas  
➢ Do not require  any sort of definition  of the schema of  the data  
➢ Offers  heterogeneous  structures  of data in  the same domain  
 
 
 
 
Simple API:  
➢ Offers  easy to use interfaces for  storage  and querying  data provided  
➢ APIs  allow  low-level  data manipulation  & selection  methods  
➢ Text-based  protocols  mostly  used with HTTP  REST with  JSON.  
➢ Web -enabled  databases  running  as internet -facing services  
 
Distributed:  
 
➢ Multiple  NoSQL  databases  can be executed  in a distributed  fashion  
➢ Offers  auto-scaling  and fail-over capabilities  
➢ Mostly  no synchronous  replication  between  distributed  nodes  Asynchronous  
Multi - Master  Replication,  peer-to-peer,  HDFS  Replication  
➢ Shared  Nothing Architecture.  This enables  less coordination  and higher  
distribution.  
 

Horizontal  scalability:   
➢ NoSQL  databases  are designed  to scale  out by adding  more  
nodes  to a database  cluster,  making  them  well-suited  for handling  
large  amounts  of data and high levels  of traffic.  
 
 
Types  of NoSQL  Databases:  
NoSQL Databases are mainly categorized into four types: Key -value 
pair, Column -oriented,  Graph -based and Document -oriented. Every 
category has its unique attributes and limitations.  None of the above -
specified database is better to solve a ll the problems. Users should select 
the database  based  on their product  needs.  
 
 
Types  of NoSQL  Databases:  
 
➢ Key-value  Pair Based  
➢ Column -oriented  Graph  
➢ Graphs  based  
➢ Document -oriented
 
 
 
 
Key Value  Pair Based:  
• These databases store data as key -value pairs, and are optimized for 
simple and fast read/write operations.  
• Key-value  pair storage  databases  store  data as a hash table  where  each key 
is unique,  and the value can  be a JSON(java Script  object  Notation),  string,  
etc. 
 
For example,  a key-value  pair may contain  a key like “Website”  associated  with 
a value  like “GeeksforGeeks” . 

 
 
• It is one of the most  basic  NoSQL  database  example.  
• This kind of NoSQL  database  is used as a collection, dictionaries, associative  
arrays, etc.  
• Key value  stores  help the developer  to store  schema -less data.  They work  best for  
shopping  cart contents.  
• Redis,  Dynamo,  Riak  are some  NoSQL  examples  of key-value  store  DataBases.  
They  are all based  on Amazon’s  Dynamo  paper.  
 
Column -based:  
• These databases store data as column families, which are sets of columns 
that are treated as a single entity. They are optimized for fast and  efficient 
querying of large amounts of data  . 
 
• They deliver high performance on aggregation queries like SUM, 
COUNT, AVG, MIN  etc. as the data is readily  available  in a column.  
• Column -based NoSQL databases are widely used to manage data 
warehouses, business  intelligence , CRM, HBase, Cassandra, are NoSQL 
query examples of column based  database.  
•  
 
Column  based  NoSQL  database  
 

 
Document -Oriented:  
• These databases store data as semi -structured documents, such as JSON 
or XML, and can be queried using document -oriented query languages.  
• Document -Oriented  NoSQL  DB stores  and retrieves  data as a key value  
pair but  the value  part is stored as a document. The docum ent is stored in 
JSON(Java Script Object  Notation)  or XML(Extensible  Markup  
Language)  formats.   
 
 
                                                        Relational  Vs. Document  

• In this diagram  on the left we have  rows  and columns,  and in the 
right,  we have  a  document  database  which  has a similar  structure  to 
JSON.  
• Now  for the relational  database,  you have  to know  what  columns  you 
have  and so on. However,  for a document  database,  you have  data store  
like JSON  object.  
• The document  type is mostly  used for blogging  platforms,  real-time 
analytics  & e- commerce applications.  
• It should  not use for complex  transactions  which  require  multiple  
operations  or queries  against  varying  aggregate  structures.  
• Amazon  SimpleDB,  CouchDB,  MongoDB,  Riak,  MongoDB,  are popular  
Document  originated  DBMS  systems.  
 
Graph -Based:  
• These databases store data as nodes and edges, and are designed to handle 
complex relationships between data.  
• The entity  is stored as  a node  with the relationship as  edges.  
• An edge  gives  a relationship  between  nodes. Every  node  and edge  has a unique  
identifier.  
 
 
• Compared  to a relational  database  where  tables  are loosely  connected,  a 
Graph  database  is a multi -relational  in nature.  
• Traversing relationship  is fast as they are already captured into the DB,  
and there is  no need  to calculate  them.  
• Graph  base database  mostly  used for social  networks,  logistics, spatial  

data.  
• Neo4J,  Infinite  Graph,  OrientDB,  are some  popular  graph -based  
databases.  
 
Advantages  of NoSQL:  
1. High  scalability  : 
• NoSQL databases use sharding(process of Storing large database 
across  multiple  machines)  for horizontal  scaling.  
•  Partitioning of data  and placing  it on multiple  machines  in such 
a way that  the order  of the data is preserved  is sharding.  
• Vertical  scaling  means  adding  more  resources  to the existing  
machine  whereas  horizontal  scaling  means  adding  more  
machines  to handle  the data.  
• Vertical  scaling  is not that easy to implement  but horizontal  
scaling  is easy to  implement.  
• Examples of horizontal scaling  databases are  MongoDB,  
Cassandra,  etc. NoSQL  can handle a huge amount of data 
because of scalability, as the data grows NoSQL  scale  itself to  
handle  that data in an efficient  manner.  
2. Flexibility:  
• NoSQL  databases  are designed  to handle  unstructured  or semi -
structured  data,  which  means  that they can accommodate  
dynamic  changes  to the data model.  
• This makes  NoSQL  databases  a good  fit for applications  that 
need  to handle  changing  data requirements.  
3. High  availability  : 
• Auto replication feature in NoSQL databases makes it highly 
available because in  case of any failure  data replicates  itself  to 
the previous  consistent  state.  
4. Performance:  
• NoSQL databases are designed to handle large amounts of data 
and traffic, which  means that they can offer improved 
performance compared to traditional relational  databases.  
5. Cost-effectiveness:  
• NoSQL databases are often more cost -effective than traditional 
relational databases , as they are typically  less complex  and do not 
require  expensive  hardware  or software.  
Disadvantages  of NoSQL:  
NoSQL  has the following  disadvantages.  
1. Lack of standardization : There are many different types of NoSQL 
databases, each  with its own unique strengths and weaknesses. This 
lack of standardization can make it  difficult  to choose  the right  
database  for a specific  application  
2. Lack  of ACID  compliance  : NoSQL  databases  are not fully  ACID -
compliant,  which  means that they do  not guarantee the consistency,  
integrity, and durability of data. This can  be a drawback  for 
applications  that require  strong  data consistency guarantees.  
3. Open -source : NoSQL is open -source database. There is no reliable  
standard for NoSQL  yet. In other  words,  two database  systems  are 
likely  to be unequal.  
4. Lack  of support  for complex queries  : NoSQL  databases  are not 
designed  to handle  complex queries, which means that they are not a 
good fit  for applications that require  complex  data analysis  or 
reporting.  
5. Management  challenge  : 
• The purpose of big data tools is to  make the  management of a  
large amount of data  as simple  as possible.  
• But it is not so easy. Data management in NoSQL is much more 
complex than in a  relational  database.  
6. Backup  : Backup  is a great  weak  point  for some  NoSQL  databases  like 
MongoDB.  MongoDB  has no approach  for the backup  of data  in a 
consistent  manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limitations of Hadoop  
Hadoop can perform only batch processing, and data will be accessed only in a 
sequential manner. That means one has to search the entire dataset even for the simplest 
of jobs.  
A huge dataset when processed results in another huge data set, which should als o be 
processed sequentially. At this point, a new solution is needed to access any point of 
data in a single unit of time (random access).  
Here comes Hbase as solution.  
 
HBase : 
• HBase is a distributed column -oriented database built on top of the Hadoop file 
system. It is an op en-source project and is horizontally scalable.  
• HBase is a data model that is similar to Google’s big table designed to provide 
quick random access to huge amounts of structured data. It leverages the fault 
tolerance provided by the Hadoop File System (HDFS).  
• It is a part of the Hadoop ecosystem that pr ovides random real -time read/write 
access to data in the Hadoop File System.  
• One can store the data in HDFS either directly or through HBase. Data 
consumer reads/accesses the data in HDFS randomly using HBase. HBase sits 
on top of the Hadoop File System an d provides read and write access.  

Storage Mechanism in HBase  
• HBase is a  column -oriented database  and the tables in it are 
sorted by row.  
• The table schema  defines only column families, which are the key 
value pairs.  
• A table have multiple column families and each column family 
can have any number of columns.  
• Subsequent column values are stored contiguously on the disk. 
Each cell value of the table has a time stamp. In short, in an 
HBase:  
• Table is a collection of rows.  
• Row is a collection of column families.  
• Column family is a collection of columns.  
• Column is a collection of key value pairs.  
Given below is an example schema of table in HBase.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The following image shows column families in a column -
oriented database : 
 
 
 
FEATURES OF  HBase:  
 
 
 
 
 

• Scalability  – HBase supports scalability in both modular and 
linear format  
• Sharding  – Sharding of tables is supported  by HBase. It is also 
configurable.  
• Consistency  – HBase also supports consistent read and write 
operations   
• Distributed storage  – Distributed storage like HDFS is 
supported by HBase  
• Failover support  – HBase supports automatic failover   
• API support  – Java A PIs are supported by HBase   
• Backup support  – Backup support for Hadoop MapReduce jobs 
in Hbase tables is available in HBase.  
• MapReduce support  – MapReduce support is available for 
parallel processing of bulk data  
• Real -time processing  – HBase supports block  cache and Bloom 
filters to make real -time processing easy.   
Applications of HBase  
• It is used whenever there is a need to write heavy applications.  
• HBase is used whenever we need to provide fast random access 
to available data.  
• Companies such as Facebook, Twitter, Yahoo, and Adobe use 
HBase internally.  
 
HBase History  
Year  Event  
Nov 
2006  Google released the paper on BigTable.  
Feb 2007  Initial HBase prototype was created as a Hadoop 
contribution.  
Oct 2007  The first usable HBase along with Hadoop 0.15.0 was 
released.  
Jan 2008  HBase became the sub project of Hadoop.  
Oct 2008  HBase 0.18.1 was released.  
Jan 2009  HBase 0.19.0 was released . 
Sept 
2009  HBase 0.20.0 was released.  
May 
2010  HBase became Apache top -level project.  
 
 HBase Architecture : 
 

HBase architecture  has different  components:  
• HMaster  
•  Region Server  
• Zookeeper  
• HDFS  
 
HMaster – 
• The implementation of Master Server in HBase is 
HMaster.  
• It is a process in which regions are assigned to region 
server as well as DDL (create, delet e table) operations.  
• It monitor all Region Server instances present in the 
cluster.  
• In a distributed environment, Master runs several 
background threads.  
•  HMaster has many features like controlling load 
balancing, failover etc.   
• Is responsible for schema changes and other metadata operations 
such as creation of tables and column families.  
 
Regions : 
• Regions are nothing but tables that are split up and spread 
across the region servers.  Regions  are the basic building 
elements of HBase cluster that consists of the distribution 
of tables and are comprised of Colum n families.  
  
Region Server –  
• HBase Tables are divided horizontally by row key range 
into Regions.   
• Region servers Communicate with the client and handle data -
related operations.  
• Handle read and write requests for all the regions under it.  
• Region Server runs on HDFS DataNode which is present 
in Hadoop cluster.  
• Regions of Region Server are responsible for several 
things, like handling, managing, executing as well as 
reads and writes HBase operations on that set of regions. 
The def ault size of a region is 256 MB.   
• When we take a deeper look into t he region server, it contain 
regions and stores as shown below:  
 
• The store contains memory store and HFiles .  
• Memstore is just like a cache memory. Anything t hat is entered 
into the HBase is stored here initially. Later, the data is transferred 
and saved in Hfiles as blocks and the memstore is flushed.  
 
  
 Zookeeper –  
• It is like a coordinator in HBase.  
• It provides services like maintaining configuration 
information, naming, providing distributed 
synchronization, server failure notification etc.  
• Clients communicate with region servers via zookeeper.   
 
HDFS  
Data is stored in HDFS  
 

Advantages  of HBase  –  
  
1. Can store large data sets   
  
2. Database can be shared   
  
3. Cost-effective from gigabytes to petabytes   
  
4. High availability through failover and replication   
 
Disadvantages  of HBase  –  
  
1. No support SQL structure   
  
2. No transaction support   
  
3. Sorted only on key   
  
4. Memory issues on the cluster   
Features of HBase architecture :  
• Distributed  and Scalable:  HBase is designed to be distributed 
and scalable, which means it can handle large datasets and can 
scale out horizontally by adding more nodes to the cluster.  
• Column -oriented  Storage:  HBase stores data in a column -
oriented manner, which means data is organized by columns 
rather than rows. This allows for efficient data retrieval and 
aggregation.  
• Hadoop  Integration:  HBase is built on top of Hadoop, which 
means it can leverage Hadoop’s distributed fil e system (HDFS) 
for storage and MapReduce for data processing.  
• Consistency  and Replication:  HBase provides strong 
consistency guarantees for read and write operations, and 
supports replication of data across multiple nodes for fault 
tolerance.  
• Built -in Caching:  HBase has a built -in caching mechanism 
that can cache frequently accessed data in memory, which can 
improve query performance.  
• Compression:  HBase supports compression of data, which can 
reduce storage requirements and improve query performance.  
• Flexi ble Schema:  HBase supports flexible schemas, which 
means the schema can be updated on the fly without requiring a 
database schema migration.  
Note  – HBase is extensively used for online analytical operations, like 
in banking applications such as real -time d ata updates in ATM 
machines, HBase can be used.  
 
CRUD Operations : 
• CRUD operations act as the foundation of any computer 
programming language or technology. So before taking a 
deeper di ve into any programming language or 
technology, one must be proficient in working on its 
CRUD operations. This same rule applies to databases as 
well.  
 
 
 
 

Create:  
• In CRUD operations, 'C' is an acronym  
for create,  which  means to add or insert data into the SQL 
table.  So, firstly we will create a table using CREATE 
comman d and then we will use the INSERT INTO 
command to insert rows in the created table.  
• Syntax for table creation:  
CREATE  TABLE  Table_Name  (ColumnName1  Datatype,  
Colu mnName2  Datatype,...,  ColumnNameN  Datatype)  
Where  
• Table_Name is the name that we want to assign to the 
table.  
• Column_Name is the attributes under which we want to 
store data of the table.  
• Datatype is assigned to each column. Datatype decides 
the type of data that will be stored in the respective 
column.  
Read:  
• In CRUD operations, 'R' is an acronym for  read,  which 
means  retrieving or fetching the data from the SQL table.   
• So, we will use the SELECT command to fetch the 
inserted record s from the SQL table.  
• We can retrieve all the records from a table using an 
asterisk (*) in a SELECT query.  
• There is also an option of retrieving only those records 
which satisfy a particular condition by using the WHERE 
clause in a SELECT query.  
Syntax to fetch all the records:  
                   SELECT  *FROM  TableName;    
Syntax to fetch records acco rding to the condition : 
          SELECT  *FROM  TableName  WHERE  CONDITION;   
 
 
Update:  
• In CRUD operations, 'U' is an acronym for 
the update,  which  means making updates to the records 
present in the SQL tables.   
• So, we will use the UPDATE command to make changes 
in the data present in tables.  
Syntax:  
UPDATE  Table_Name  SET ColumnName  = Value  WHERE  
CONDITION;  
 
Delete:  
• In CRUD operations, 'D' is an acronym for  delete,  which 
means  removing or deleting the records from the SQ L 
tables.   
• We can delete all the rows from the SQL tables using the 
DELETE query.  
• There is also an option to remove only the specific records 
that satisfy a particular condition by using t he WHERE 
clause in a DELETE query.  
 
Syntax to delete all  the records : 
DELETE  FROM  TableName;    
 
Syntax to delete records according to the condition:  
 DELETE  FROM  TableName  WHERE  CONDITION;    
 
