BIG DATA ANALYTICS  
UNIT – II 
Anatomy of Hadoop map -reduce (Input Splits, map phase, shuffle, 
sort, combiner, reduce phase) (theory)  
Hive: Introduction to Hive, data types and file formats, HiveQL data 
definition(Creating Databases and Tables),HiveQL for Data  loading, 
HiveQL data manipulation, Logical joins, Window functions, 
Optimization, Table partitioning, Bucketing, Indexing, Join Strategies.  
 
Hadoop Map-Reduce  : 
• Hadoop  MapReduce  is a programming model or framework 
which is used for for data processing . It processes the huge amount 
of structured and unstructured data stored in HDFS. Hadoop can 
run Map Reduce programs written in Java, Ruby and Python.  
MapReduce processes data in parallel by dividing the job into the 
set of independent tasks. So, parallel proc essing improves speed 
and reliability. In Map Reduce programming, Jobs(applications) are 
split into a set of map tasks and reduce tasks.  
 
 

 MAP TASK: -Map task takes care of loading, parsing, 
transforming and filtering data . It Converts input into key -value 
pairs. Each map task is broken down into the following phases:  
1. Record Reader  
2. Mapper  
3. Combiner  
4.Partitioner.  
 REDUCE TASK: -The responsibility of reduce task is grouping 
and aggregating data that is produced by map tasks to generate 
final outpu t. It Combines output of mappers as the input to Reduce 
task and  produces a reduced result set. The reduce tasks are 
broken down into the following phases:  
1. Shuffle  
2. Sort  
3. Reducer  
4. Output format.  
 
 There are two Daemons  associated with Map-Reduce 
Programming:  
 Job Tracker and  
 Task Tracer  
Job Tracker: Job Tracker is a master daemon . The work of Job tracker 
is to manage all the resources and all the jobs across the cluster and also 
to schedule each map on the Task Tracker running on the same data 
node since there can be hundreds of data nodes available in the cluster.  
• It provides connectivity between Hadoop and application.  
• Whenever code submitted to a cluster, Job Tracker creates the 
execution plan by deciding which task to assign to which node.  
• It also monitors all the running tasks. When task fails it 
automatically re -schedules the task to a different node after a 
predefined number of retires.  
• There will be one job Tracker process running on a single Hadoop 
cluster.  
Task Tracker: Task Tracker is  known as  Slave  daemon.  
• The Task Tracker can be considered as the actual slaves that are 
working on the instruction given by the Job Tracker. This Task 
Tracker is deployed on each of the nodes available in the cluster 
that executes the Map and Reduce task as instructed by Job 
Tracker.  
• This is responsible for executing individual tasks that is assigned 
by the Job Tracker.  
• Task Tracker continuously sends heartbeat  message/ signal to  job 
tracker. Heartbeat  is the signal that is sent by the Task tracker  to 
the Job Tracker after the regular interval to time to indicate its 
presence, i.e. to indicate that it is alive . 
• When a job tracker fails to receive a heartbeat message from a 
Task Tracker, the Job Tracker assumes that the Task Tracker has 
failed and resubmits the task to another available node in the 
cluster.  
 
Map Reduce Framework   
Phases:  
Map:  Converts input into key -value pairs.  
Reduce:  Combines output of mappers and produces a reduced result  
set.   
Daemons:  
Job Tracker:  Master, Schedules Task  
Task Tra cker:  Slave, Execute task  
 
Working of Hadoop Map Reduce: (Input Splits, map 
phase, shuffle, sort, combiner, reduce phase)  

 
1. Input Files : 
In input files data for MapReduce job is stored. In  HDFS , input files 
reside. Input files format is arbitrary.  
2. InputFormat : 
After that InputFormat defines how to split and read these input files. It 
selects the files or other objects for input. InputFormat creates 
InputSplit.  
3. InputSplits : 
It represents the data which will be processed by an individual  Mapper . 
For each split, one map task is created. Thus the number of map tasks is 
equal to the number of InputSplits. Framework divide split into records, 
which mapper process.  

 
Key-value pair Generation in MapReduce  
• In MapReduce process, before passing the data to t he mapper  data 
should be first converted into key -value pairs.  
• key-value pairs in Hadoop MapReduce is generated as follows:  
• InputSplit  – Input Split  in Hadoop  Map Reduce  is the logical 
representation of data. It describes a unit of work that contains a 
single map task in a Map Reduce program.  
• Hadoop Input Split represents the data which is processed by an 
individual  Mapper.  
• The split is divided into records. Hence, the mapper process each 
record (which is a  key-value pair).  
• The important thing to notice is  that Input split does not contain the 
input Data it is just a reference to the data.  
• As a user, we don‟t need to deal with Input Split directly, because 
they are created by an  Input Format(Input Format creates the Input 
split and divide into records).  

 
 4. RecordReader : 
 It communicates with the inputSplit. It converts the Split into 
records  which are in form of key -value pairs that are suitable for 
reading by the mapper.In Hadoop terminology, each line in a text 
is termed as a  ‘record’.  
 Record reader  converts this text into (key, value) pair depends on 
the format of the file.  
 It defines Record Reader using createRecordReader()  
 RecordReader by default uses TextInputFormat to convert data into a 
key-value pair.  
 RecordReader communicates with the InputSplit until the file 
reading is not completed.  
 Then, the key -value pairs are further sent to the mapper  for further 
processing.  
5.Mapper:  
 Mapper  task is the first phase of processing that processes each 
input record  produced  (from RecordReader) and generates a n 
intermediate key -value pair.  The intermediate output is 

completelydifferent from the input pair.  
 Hadoop Mapper store intermediate -output on the local disk . 
  It doesn‟t store, as data  on HDFSas data  is temporary and writing 
on HDFS will create unnecessary  multiple copies.  
 The output of the Mappers  is then passed to the Combiner for 
further processing.  
6. Combiner: Combiner  always works in between Mapper and Reducer.  
 The output produced by the Mapper is the intermediate output in 
terms of key -value pairs w hich is massive in size. If we directly 
feed this huge output to the Reducer, then that will result in 
increasing the  Network Congestion . So, to minimize this 
Network congestion we have to put combiner in between Mapper 
and Reducer. These combiners are als o known as  semi -reducer .  
• It takes intermediate <keys, value> pairs provided by mapper and 
applies user specific aggregate function to only one mapper. It is 
also known as local Reducer.  
• We can optionally specify a combiner using Job.setCombinerClass 
(Red ucerClass) to perform local aggregation on intermediate 
outputs.  
 

7. Partitioner:  
● Partitioner comes into the existence if we are working with more than 
one reducer. It takes the output of the combiner and performs 
partitioning.  Partitioning of output takes place on the basis of the key in 
MapReduce. On the basis of key value in MapReduce, partitioning of 
each combiner output takes place. And then the record having the same 
key value goes into the same partition. After that, each partition is sent 
to a reduce r. 
● Values of the same key are sent to the same reducer. This helps to 
determine which reducer is responsible for which key.  
● In MapReduce, the number of partitioners and reducers are the 
same. The output of a single partitioner is sent to a single reducer.  
If there is only one reducer no partitioner will be created.  
● Take intermediate <keys, value> pairs produced by the mapper, 
splits them into partitions the data using a user -defined condition.  
● Partitioning in MapReduce execution allows even distribution of the 
map output over the reducer.  
 
 
 

8. Shuffling and Sorting : 
● Before passing this intermediate data to the reducer, it is first 
passed through two more stages, called  Shuffling and Sorting . 
● Shuffling Phase:  The process of transferring data from the 
mappers to reducers is known as shuffling.  
● This phase combines all values associated to an identical key. For 
eg, if (Blue , 1) is there three times in the input file. So after the 
shuffling phase, the output will be like ( Blue , [1,1,1]).  
● Sorting Phase:  Once s huffling is done, the output is sent to the 
sorting phase where all the (key, value) pairs are sorted 
automatically. In Hadoop sorting is an automatic process because 
of the presence of an inbuilt interface 
called  WritableComparableInterface.  
● This is then provided as input to reduce phase.  
 
 
Example:  
 

9.Reducer : 
● Reduce is the second phase of processing where the user can specify his own 
custom business logic as per the requirements.  
● Reducer then takes set of intermediate key -value pairs produced by the 
mappers as the input.    
● After that runs a reducer function on each of them to generate the output.  
● The output of the reducer is the final output. Then framework stores the 
output on HDFS.  
 RecordWriter : 
● The output format translate the final key/value pair fro m the reduce 
function and writes it out to a file by a record writer. It writes these 
output key -value pair from the Reducer phase to the output files.  
 
10. OutputFormat : 
● OutputFormat defines the way how it writes these output key -value 
pairs in output files. So, its instances provided by the Hadoop write files 
in HDFS.  
● Thus OutputFormat instances write the final output of reducer on 
HDFS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAPREDUCE WORD COUNT EXAMPLE  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Hive – Introduction to Hive :  
● The Hadoop ecosystem contains different sub -projects (tools) such 
as Sqoop, Pig, an d Hive that are used to help Hadoop modules.  
● There are various ways to execute MapReduce operations:  
1. The traditional approach using Java MapReduce program  for 
structured, semi -structured, and unstructured data.  
2. The scripting approach  for MapReduce to proc ess structured and 
semi structured data using Pig.  
3. The Hive Query Language  (HiveQL or HQL) for MapReduce to 
process structured data using Hive.  
 

What is HIVE  
● Hive is a data warehouse system or Tool which is used for 
Querying and Analyzing the structured da ta.  
● It is built on the top of Hadoop.  
● Initially Hive was developed by Facebook query their huge amount 
of data each day (around 20TB)  ,later the Apache Software 
Foundation took it up and developed it further as an open source 
under the name Apache Hive.  
● It is used by different companies. For example, Amazon uses it in 
Amazon Elastic MapReduce.  
● Hive provides the functionality of reading, writing, and 
managing  large datasets residing in distributed storage.  
● It runs SQL like queries called HQL  (Hive query la nguage) which 
gets internally converted to MapReduce jobs.  
● Using Hive, we can skip the requirement of the traditional 
approach of writing complex MapReduce programs.  
● Hive supports Data Definition Language (DDL), Data 
Manipulation Language (DML), and User Defined Functions 
(UDF).  
 
 
 
 
                                       Data flow  
 

Features of HIVE:  
 
● Open -Source:  It is an open -source tool so we can use it free of 
cost. 
● File Formats:  It supports various types of file formats such as 
textfile, ORC, Parquet , etc.  
● Hive -Query Language:  This language is similar to SQL. Only the 
basic knowledge of SQL is enough to work with Hive such as 
tables, rows, columns, and schema, etc.  
● Fast:  Hive is a Fast, scalable, extensible tool and uses familiar 
concepts.  
● Table Struc ture:  Hive as data warehouse designed for managing 
and querying only structured data that is stored in tables that is 
similar to RDBMS Tables.  
● Ad-hoc Queries:  Hive allows us to run ad -hoc queries which are 
the commands or queries whose value depends on som e variable 
for the data analysis.  
● ETL Support:  ETL Functionalities such as Extraction, 
Transformation, and Loading data into tables coupled with joins, 
partitions, etc.  
 

HIVEArchitectur e: 
 
 
Hive Consists of Mainly 3 core parts  
1. Hive Clients  
2. Hive Services  
3. Hive Storage and Computing  
Hive  Client : 
Hive provides multiple drivers with multiple types of applications for 
communication. Hive allows writing applications in various languages, 
including Java, Python, and C++. It supports different types of clients 
such as:- 
● Hive Thrift Clients - It is a cross -language service provider 
platform that serves the request from all those programming 
languages that supports Thrift.  
● JDBC Driver - It is used to establish a connection between hive 
and Java applications. The JDBC Dr iver is present in the class 
org.apache.hadoop.hive.jdbc.HiveDriver.  

● ODBC Driver - It allows the applications that support the ODBC 
protocol to connect to Hive.  
Hive Services : 
The following are the services provided by Hive: - 
● Hive CLI - The Hive CLI (Command  Line Interface) is a shell 
where we can execute Hive queries and commands.  
● Hive Web User Interface  - The Hive Web UI is just an alternative 
of Hive CLI. It provides a web -based GUI for executing Hive 
queries and commands.  
● Hive MetaStore - It is a central r epository that stores all the 
structure information of various tables and partitions in the 
warehouse. It also includes metadata of column and its type 
information, the serializers and deserializers which is used to read 
and write data and the correspondin g HDFS files where the data is 
stored.  
● Hive Server - It is referred to as Apache Thrift Server. It accepts 
the request from different clients and provides it to Hive Driver.  
● Hive Driver - It receives queries from different sources like web 
UI, CLI, Thrift, a nd JDBC/ODBC driver. It transfers the queries to 
the compiler.  
● Hive Compiler - The purpose of the compiler is to parse the query 
and perform semantic analysis on the different query blocks and 
expressions. It converts HiveQL statements into MapReduce jobs.  
● Hive Execution Engine - Optimizer generates the logical plan . 
Execution Engine process the queries and generates the results 
same as mapreduce results. In the end, the execution engine 
executes the incoming tasks in the order of their dependencies.  
Hive  Storage  and Computing:  
 
Hive services, such as the Meta Store, the file system, and work clients, 
are also involved in and do the following for the Hive repository.  
 Metadata tables created in Hive are stored in the "Meta storage 
database" in Hive.  
 The results  of the query and data loaded in the tables will be stored 
on HDFS in the Hadoop cluster.  
 
Working of HIVE:  
 
1. Execute Query : The Hive interface such as Command Line or 
Web UI sends query to Driver (any database driver such as JDBC, 
ODBC, etc.) to execute.  
2. Get Plan :The driver takes the help of query compiler that parses 
the query to check the syntax and query plan or the requirement of 
query.  
3. Get Metadata : The compiler sends metadata request to Metastore 
(any database).  
4. Send Metadata :Meta store  sends metad ata as a response to the 
compiler.  
5. Send Plan :The compiler checks the requirement and resends the 
plan to the driver. Up to here, the parsing and compiling of a query 
is complete.  

6. Execute Plan : The driver sends the execute plan to the execution 
engine.  
7. Execute Job :Internally, the process of execution job is a 
MapReduce job. The execution engine sends the job to JobTracker, 
which is in Name node and it assigns this job to TaskTracker, 
which is in Data node. Here, the query executes MapReduce job.  
7.1 Metad ata Ops :Meanwhile in execution, the execution engine 
can execute metadata operations with Metastore.  
8.  Fetch Result :The execution engine receives the results from Data 
nodes.  
9. Send Results :The execution engine sends those resultant values 
to the drive r. 
10. Send Results :The driver sends the results to Hive Interfaces.  
Advantages of Hive Architecture:  
 Scalability : Hive is a distributed system that can easily scale to 
handle large volumes of data by ad ding more nodes to the 
cluster.  
 Data Accessibility : Hive allows users to access data stored in 
Hadoop without the need for complex programming skills. 
SQL -like language is used for queries and  HiveQL is based on 
SQL syntax.  
 Data Integration:  Hive integrates easily with other tools and 
systems in the Hadoop ecosystem such as Pig, H Base, and 
MapReduce.  
 Flexibility:  Hive can handle both structured and unstructured 
data, and supports various data f ormats including CSV, JSON, 
andParquet.  
 Security:  Hive provides security features such as authentication, 
authorizat ion, and encryption to ensure data privacy.  
HIVE DATA TYPES : 
 
 
 
 

PRIMITIVEDATATYPES  
Numeric Data Types  
Integer Types  
Type  Size Range  
TINYINT  1-byte signed integer  -128 to 127  
SMALLINT  2-byte signed integer  32,768 to 32,767  
INT 4-byte signed integer  2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647  
BIGINT  8-byte signed integer  -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807  
 
Decimal Type :The syntax and example is as follows:  
  DECIMAL(precision, scale)  
                     Eg: decimal(10,0)  
Type  Size Range  
FLOAT 4-byte Single precision floating point number (32 Bytes)  
DOUBLE  8-byte Double precision floating point number (64 Bytes)  
 
String Data Type: String Data is divided into three types:  
• String  
• Varchar  
• char 
 
String  
• The string is a sequence of characters. It va lues can be enclosed 
within single quotes (') or double quotes (").  
Varchar  
• The varchar is a variable length type whose range lies between 1 
and 65535 bytes, which specifies that the maximum number of 
characters allowed in the character string.  
  Data Type   Length  
VARCHAR   1 to 65355  
 CHAR           255  
 
Char  
• The char is a type of fixed length, with a maximum length of 255.  
 
Date/Time Data Type: The Hive data types in this category are:  
• TimeStamp  
• Date  
TimeStamp  
• It is used for nanosecond precision and denoted by YYYY -MM-
DD hh:mm:ss  format.  
Date  
• The date value is used in the form  ‟YYYY -MM-DD‟ to determine 
a particular year, month, and day. It does not provide the time of 
the day.  
Miscellaneous Data Type : 
• Different types of data support both Boolean and binary t ypes of 
data.  
• Boolean  
• Binary  
• Boolean: - 
• The Boolean stores the value either  true or false . 
• Binary: - 
• It is defined as an array of bytes.  
 
COMPLEX DATA TYPES  : Complex Data is divide into three 
types:  
• Array  
• Map  
• Struct  
• Array  
•  Array is defined as the collection  of similar data types. The value 
of such data types are indexable using the zero -based Integer.  
• Arrays in Hive are used the same way they are used in Java.  
                             Syntax: ARRAY<data_type>  
• Map  
•  It is a collection of key -value pairs. T he Keys can be primitives 
values, or any data type. The keys and values for a specific map 
must be of the same type.  
                             Syntax: MAP<primitive_type, data_type>  
• Struct  
•  It is defined as the collection of named fields. The field can be of 
different types.  
• The Struct is similar to the STRUCT present in C language).  
Syntax: STRUCT<col_name : data_type [COMMENT 
col_comment],...>  
 
Hive File Formats:  
 
• Hive supports various file formats for data storage and retrieval. 
The choice of file fo rmat can impact the performance, 
compression, and compatibility of your Hive tables. Here are some 
commonly used file formats in Hive:  
1. TextFile : 
1. The default storage format in Hive is plain text, where each line in a 

file represents a record, and fields wit hin a record are delimited by 
a specified character (e.g., tab, comma, or custom delimiter).  
2. TextFile format is human -readable but not space -efficient or 
suitable for complex data structures.  
2. SequenceFile : 
1. SequenceFiles are a binary file format optimized f or Hadoop's 
MapReduce and Hive. They can store key -value pairs efficiently.  
2. When converting queries to MapReduce jobs, Hive chooses to use 
the necessary key -value pairs for a given record.  
3. The key advantages of using a sequence file are that it incorpora tes 
two or more files into one file.  
4. The sequence file format storage option is defined by 
specifying   “STORED AS SEQUENCEFILE ” at the end of the 
table creation.  
3. ORC (Optimized Row Columnar)  
1. The Optimized Row Columnar (ORC) file format provides a 
highly ef ficient way to store data in the Hive table.  
2. This file system was actually designed to overcome 
limitations of the other Hive file formats.  
3. ORC reduces I/O overhead by accessing only the columns 
that are required for the current query. It requires 
signif icantly fewer seek operations because all columns 
within a single group of row data are stored together on disk. 
The ORC file format storage option is defined by specifying 
“STORED AS ORC ” at the end of the table creation.  
4. ORC files are compressed and use lightweight compression 
algorithms, making them efficient for both storage and query 
performance.  
RCFILE  
RCFile = Record Columnar File  
 RCFILE is used when we want to perform operations on multiple 
rows at a time.  
 RCFILEs are flat files consisting of binary  key/value pairs, which 
shares many similarities with SEQUENCEFILE.  
 RCFILE stores columns of a table in form of record in a columnar 
manner. It first partitions rows horizontally into row splits and then 
it vertically partitions each row split in a column ar way.  
 RCFILE first stores the metadata of a row split, as the key part of a 
record, and all the data of a row split as the value part. This means 
that RCFILE encourages column oriented storage rather than row 
oriented storage.  
 
Hive Parquet File Format  
 Parquet is a column -oriented binary file format.  
 The parquet is highly efficient for the types of large -scale 
queries. Parquet is especially good for queries scanning 
particular columns within a particular table.  
 The Parquet table uses compression Snappy , gzip; currently 
Snappy by default.  
 Create Parquet file by specifying „STORED AS PARQUET‟ 
option at the end of a CREATE TABLE Command.  
HiveQL data definition(Creating Databases 
and Tables) : 
• Hive Query Language(HQL)  
• Hive Query Language is a language used i n Hive, similar to SQL, 
Hive Query Language is easy to use if you are familiar with  SQL. 
The syntax of Hive QL is very similar to SQL with slight 
differences.  
• Hive QL supports DDL, DML, and user -defined functions . 
• In Hive, Data Definition Language (DDL) co mmands are used to 
define, manage, and manipulate the structure of database objects 
such as tables, views, and partitions.  
DDL Commands : The following is the list of DDL statements 
that are supported in Apache Hive.  
1. CREATE  
2. DROP  
3. TRUNCATE  
4. ALTER  
5. SHOW  
6. DESCRIB E 
7. USE  
1. CREATE DATABASE in Hive  
● The CREATE DATABASE  statement is used to create a database 
in the Hive. A database in Hive is a collection of tables.  
Syntax:  
CREATE (DATABASE) [ IF NOT EXISTS] database_name  
[COMMENT database_comment]  
[LOCATION hdfs_path]  
[WITH DBPROPERTIES (property_name=property_value, ...)];  
or 
• CREATE SCHEMA database_name ; 
Here, IF NOT EXISTS is an optional clause, which notifies the user that 
a database with the same name already exists. We can use SCHEMA in 
place of DATABASE in this comman d.  
Example:  
Here in this example, we are creating a database „dataflair‟.  
 
 
2. SHOW DATABASE in Hive  
• The SHOW DATABASES  statement lists all the databases 
present in the Hive.  
• Syntax:  
SHOW (DATABASES);  
Example:
 

 
 
3. DESCRIBE DATABASE in Hive  
• The DESCRIBE D ATABASE  statement in Hive shows the name 
of Database in Hive, its comment (if set), and its location on the 
file system.  
• The EXTENDED  can be used to get the database properties.  
Syntax:  
   DESCRIBE DATABASE [EXTENDED] db_name;  
 

 
4.DROP DATABASE in Hive  
• The DROP DATABASE  statement in Hive is used to Drop 
(delete) the database.  
• The default behavior is RESTRICT which means that the database 
is dropped only when it is empty. To drop the database with tables, 
we can use CASCADE.  
• Syntax:  
 DROP (DATABASE|SCHEMA)  [IF EXISTS] database_name   
[RESTRICT|CASCADE];  
Here in this example, we are dropping a database „dataflair‟ using the 
DROP statement.  
 
 

Creation of Tables:  
The way of creating tables in the hive is very much similar to the way we create tables 
in SQL.  
Syntax:  
Hive> CREATE TABLE [IF NOT EXISTS] <table -name> (<column -
name><data -type>,<column -name><data -type> COMMENT 'Your 
Comment',<column -name><data -type>)COMMENT 'Add if you want'  
LOCATION 'Location On HDFS'  
ROW FORMAT DELIMITED  
FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',' STO RED AS FILE FORMAT ; 
 
Here  ROW  FORMAT  DELIMITED  shows that whenever a new line is 
encountered the new record entry . 
 
Example:  
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS student_data(Student_Name STRING 
COMMENT 'This col. Store the name of student', Student_Rollno INT 
COMM ENT 'This col. Stores the rollno of student',Student_Marks FLOAT)  
ROW FORMAT DELIMITED  
FIELDS TERMINATED BY ','  STORED AS TEXTFILE ;  
 
 
Show  table:  
   Syntax : 
      SHOW TABLES [IN <database_name>];  

   Command:  
          SHOW TABLES IN student_detail;  
 
 
Hive DML Operations :Apache Hive DML stands for 
(Data Manipulation Language) which is used to insert, update, delete, 
and fetch data from Hive tables. Using DML commands we can load 
files into Apache Hive tables, write data into the file system from Hive 
queries, perform merge operation on the table, and so on.  
The following list of DML statements is supported by Apache Hive.  
1. LOAD  
2. SELECT  
3. INSERT  
4. DELETE  
5. UPDATE  
HiveQL for Data loading : 
In hive with DML statem ents, we  can Load  data  to the Hive  table  in 
2 different  ways . 
 Using INSERT Command  
 Load Data Statement  
1. Using  INSERT  Command  
Syntax:  

INSERT INTO TABLE <table_name> VALUES (<add values as per 
column entity>);  
Example:  
To insert data into the table let‟s c reate a table with the 
name  student  (By default hive uses its  default  database to store hive 
tables) . 
Command:   
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS student(  
Student_Name STRING,  
Student_Rollno INT,  
Student_Marks FLOAT)  
ROW FORMAT DELIMITED  
FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',';  
EXAMPLE:  
 
 
INSERT  Query:  
INSERT INTO TABLE student VALUES ('Dikshant',1,'95'),('Akshat', 
2 , '96'),('Dhruv',3,'90');  

 
 check the data of the  student  table with the help of the below command.  
SELECT * FROM student;  
 
 
2. Load  Data  Statement : 
Hive provi des us the functionality to load pre -created table entities 
either from our local file system or from HDFS. The  LOAD  DATA  
 statement is used to load data into the hive table.  
Syntax:  
LOAD DATA [LOCAL] INPATH '<The table data location>' 
[OVERWRITE] INTO TAB LE <table_name>;  
 The LOCAL  Switch specifies  that the data we are loading is 
available in our Local File System. If the  LOCAL  switch is not 
used, the hive will consider the location as an HDFS  path 
location.  
 The OVERWRITE switch allows us to overwrite the t able data.  
 LOAD  DATA  to the student hive table with the help of the below 
command.  
 LOAD DATA LOCAL INPATH 
'/home/dikshant/Documents/data.csv' INTO TABLE student;  

 
 
SELECT * FROM student ;   
 
Thus from above table We can observe that we have successfully a dded 
the data to the  student  table . 
 
The Select statement project the records from the table.  
Select Command Syntax:  
SELECT  [ALL  | DISTINCT]  select_expr,  select_expr,  ... 
  FROM  table_reference  
  [WHERE  where_condition]  
  [GROUP  BY col_list]  
  [ORDER  BY col_list]  
  [CLUSTER  BY col_list  
    | [DISTRIBUTE  BY col_list]  [SORT  BY col_list]  
  ] 
 [LIMIT  [offset,]  rows]  
Select Command Statement:  
SELECT  * FROM  cloudduggudb.userdata  WHERE  userid=389;  
Example:  

 
 
Update Command:  
The Update command updates the existing  records if where clause is 
supplied otherwise it will delete table data. We can‟t perform update 
command on Partitioning and Bucketing columns.  
Update Command Syntax:  
UPDATE  tablename  SET column  = value  [, column  = value  ...] [WHER
E expression];  
Delete Co mmand Syntax:  
DELETE  FROM  tablename  [WHERE  expression];  
 
Joins: 
 Apache Hive JOINs are used to combine columns from one (self -
join) or more tables by using values common to each. Using join 
we can fetch corresponding records from two or more tables. It is 
almost similar to SQL joins . 
  There  are some  points  we need   to observe  about  Hive  Join:  
 In Hive  Joins,  only Equality  joins  are allowed.  
 However,  in the same  query  more  than two tables  can be 
joined.  
 Also,  note that Hive  Joins  are not Commutative  
 
 

 
 
Examp le of Join  in Hive  
Example of  Hive  Join  – HiveQL  Select  Clause.  
Consider  the  following  table  named  CUSTOMERS  & ORDERS  table  
Table.1  Hive  Join  Example(CUSTOMERS  TABLE):  
 
ID Name  Age Address  Salary  
1 Ross  32 Ahmedabad  2000  
2 Rachel  25 Delhi  1500  
3 Chandl er 23 Kota  2000  
4 Monika  25 Mumbai  6500  
5 Mike  27 Bhopal  8500  
6 Phoebe  22 MP 4500  
7 Joey  24 Indore  10000  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table.2  – Hive  Join  Example (ORDERS  Table):  
OID Date  Customer_ID  Amount  
102 2016 -10-08 00:00:00  3 3000  
100 2016 -10-08 00:00:00  3 1500  
101 2016 -11-20 00:00:00  2 1560  
103 2015 -05-20 00:00:00  4 2060  
 
Inner  Join : Returns records that have matching values in both  
tables . 
 
Synta x: 
hive>SELECT  c.ID,  c.NAME,  c.AGE,  o.AMOUNT  
FROM  CUSTOMERS  c JOIN  ORDERS  oON  (c.ID  = 
o.CUSTOMER_ID);  
 
Example:  Inner  Join  in Hive - output   
ID Name  Age Amount  
3 Chandler  23 3000 
3 Chandler  23 1500  
2 Rachel  25 1560  
4 Monika  25 2060  
 

Left Outer  Join:  Returns all records from the left table, and the matched 
records from the right table. Although, it returns with NULL in  each 
column from the right table  in case of no matching JOIN predicate.  
 
Syntax:   
hive> SELECT c.ID, c.NAME, o.AMOUNT, o.DATE  
FROM CUSTOMERS c LEFT OUTER JOIN ORDERS o ON (c.ID 
= o.CUSTOMER_ID);  
 
Example : Left  Outer  Join  in Hive  Output  
ID Name  Amount  Date 
1 Ross  NULL  NULL  
2 Rachel  1560  2016 -11-20 00:00:00  
3 Chandler  3000  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
3 Chandler  1500  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
4 Monika  2060  2015 -05-20 00:00:00  
5 Mike  NULL  NULL  
6 Phoebe  NULL  NULL  
7 Joey  NULL  NULL  
 
Right  Outer  Join:  
Returns all re cords from the right table, and the matched records from 
the left table. Although, it returns with NULL in each column from the 
left table in case of no matching join predicate.  
 

 
Syntax:  
hive> SELECT c.ID, c.NAME, o.AMOUNT, o.DATE FROM 
CUSTOMERS c RIGHT OUTER JOIN ORDERS o ON (c.ID = 
o.CUSTOMER_ID);  
 
Example  Right  Outer  Join  in Hive  Output:  
ID Name  Amount  Date  
3 Chandler  1300  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
3 Chandler  1500  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
2 Rachel  1560  2016 -11-20 00:00:00  
4 Monika  2060  2015 -05-20 00:00:00  
 
Full Outer  Join : The major purpose of this HiveQL Full outer Join is it 
combines the records of both the left and the right outer tables which 
fulfills the Hive JOIN condition. Moreover, this joined table contains 
either all the records from both the table s or fills in NULL values for 
missing matches on either side.  
 
 

Syntax:  
hive> SELECT c.ID, c.NAME, o.AMOUNT, o.DATE FROM 
CUSTOMERS c FULL OUTER JOIN ORDERS o ON (c.ID = 
o.CUSTOMER_ID);  
 
Example:  Full  Outer  Join  in Hive  Output:   
ID Name  Amount  Date  
1 Ross NULL  NULL  
2 Rachel  1560  2016 -11-20 00:00:00  
3 Chandler  3000  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
3 Chandler  1500  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
4 Monika  2060  2015 -05-20 00:00:00  
5 Mike  NULL  NULL  
6 Phoebe  NULL  NULL  
7 Joey  NULL  NULL  
3 Chandler  3000  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
3 Chan dler 1500  2016 -10-08 00:00:00  
2 Rachel  1560  2016 -11-20 00:00:00  
4 Monika  2060  2015 -05-20 00:00:00  
 
 
Window functions  in HIVE:  
● A window function  performs a calculation across a set of table 
rows  . 
● The use of the windowing feature is to create a window on the set 
of data , in order to operate aggregation like Standard 
aggregations:  
● Window functions in Hive are two types  
 
Aggregate functions  
● COUNT()  
● SUM()  
● MIN()  
● MAX()  
● AVG()  
 
Analyticalfunctions  
● LEAD  
● LAG  
● FIRST _VALUE  
● LAST_VALUE  
● OVER Clause(PARTITION BY,ORDER BY ) 
 
 
 
 

Consider an Example  Table :  
 
ID FIRST_NAME  LAST_NAME  DESIGNATION  DEPARTMENT  SALARY  
1001  Jervis  Roll Director of Sales  Sales  30000  
1002  Gordon  Mattster  Marketing Manager  Sales  25000  
1003  Gracie  Fronllen  Assistant Manage r Sales  25000  
1004  Joelly  Wellback  Account Coordinator  Account  15000  
1005  Bob Havock  Accountant II  Account  20000  
1006  Carmiae  Courage  Account Coordinator  Account  15000  
1007  Cellie  Trevaskiss  Assistant Manager  Sales  25000  
1008  Gally  Johnson  Manager  Account  28000  
1009  Richard  Grill Account Coordinator  Account  12000  
1010  Sofia  Ketty  Sales Coordinator  Sales  20000  
SELECT <columns_name>, <aggregate>(column_name) OVER (<windowing 
specification>) FROM <table_name>;  
where,  
● column_name  – column name of the ta ble 
● Aggregate  – Any aggregate function(s) like COUNT, AVG, MIN, MAX  
● Windowing specification  – It includes following:  
PARTITION BY  – Takes a column(s) of the table as a reference.  
ORDER BY  – Specified the Order of column(s) either Ascending or 
Descending.  
PARTITION BY  
Count Employees in each department  
 
Syntax:  
 SELECT department, COUNT(id) OVER (PARTITION BY 
department) FROM emp_dept_tbl;  
 
ORDER BY  
Case  I: Without PARTITION  
Count Employee with salary descending order  
Syntax  
SELE CT id, department, salary, COUNT(id) OVER (ORDER BY salary 
DESC) FROM emp_dept_tbl;  
 
 

Case II: With PARTITION  
Count Employees of each department order by salary  
Syntax:     
SELECT id, department, salary, COUNT(id) OVER (PARTITION BY department 
ORDER BY sa lary DESC) FROM emp_dept_tbl;  
 
LEAD : 
It is an analytics function used to return the data from the next set of 
rows. By default, the lead is of 1 row and it will return NULL in case it 
exceeds the current window.  
Syntax: 
SELECT id, first_name, designation,  department,salary, LEAD(id) OVER 
(PARTITION BY department ORDER BY salary) FROM emp_dept_tbl;  
OUTPUT:  
 
 
ID FIRST_NAME  DESIGNATION  DEPARTMENT  SALARY  LEAD  

1009  Richard  Account Coordinator  Account  12000  1004  
1004  Joelly  Account Coordinator  Account  15000  1006 
1006  Carmiae  Account Coordinator  Account  15000  1005  
1005  Bob Accountant II  Account  20000  1008  
1008  Gally  Manager  Account  28000  NULL  
1010  Sofia  Sales Coordnitor  Sales  20000  1002  
1002  Gordon  Marketing Manager  Sales  25000  1003  
1003  Gracie  Assistant Manager  Sales  25000  1007  
1007  Cellie  Assistant Manager  Sales  25000  1001  
1001  Jervis  Director of Sales  Sales  30000  NULL  
 
 
 
LAG : 
It is the opposite of LEAD function, it returns the data from the previous 
set of data. By default lag is of 1 row and return  NULL in case the lag 
for the current row is exceeded before the beginning of the window:  
Syntax:  
SELECT id, first_name, designation, department,salary, LAG(id) OVER 
(PARTITION BY department ORDER BY salary) FROM 
emp_dept_tbl;  
OUTPUT:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

ID FIRST_NAME  DESIGNATION  DEPARTMENT  SALARY  LAG  
1009  Richard  Account Coordinator  Account  12000  NULL  
1004  Joelly  Account Coordinator  Account  15000  1009  
1006  Carmiae  Account Coordinator  Account  15000  1004  
1005  Bob Accountant II  Account  20000  1006  
1008  Gally  Manager  Account  28000  1005  
1010  Sofia  Sales Coordnitor  Sales  20000  NULL  
1002  Gordon  Marketing Manager  Sales  25000  1010  
1003  Gracie  Assistant Manager  Sales  25000  1002  
1007  Cellie  Assistant Manager  Sales  25000  1003  
1001  Jervis  Director of Sales  Sales  30000  1007  
 
 
FIRST_VALUE : 
This function returns the value from the first row in the window based 
on the clause and assigned to all the rows of the same group:  
Syntax:  
 SELECT id, first_name, designation, department,salary, 
FIRST_VALUE(id) OVER (PARTITION BY departm ent ORDER BY 
salary) FROM emp_dept_tbl;  
 
OUTPUT:  
 
 
 
 
 

ID FIRST_NAME  DESIGNATION  DEPARTMENT  SALARY  FIRST_VALUE  
1009  Richard  Account 
Coordinator  Account  12000  1009  
1004  Joelly  Account 
Coordinator  Account  15000  1009  
1006  Carmiae  Account 
Coordinator  Account  15000  1009  
1005  Bob Accountant II  Account  20000  1009  
1008  Gally  Manager  Account  28000  1009  
1010  Sofia  Sales 
Coordnitor  Sales  20000  1010  
1002  Gordon  Marketing 
Manager  Sales  25000  1010  
1003  Gracie  Assistant 
Manager  Sales  25000  1010  
1007  Cellie  Assista nt 
Manager  Sales  25000  1010  
1001  Jervis  Director of 
Sales  Sales  30000  1010  
      
 
 
 
LAST_VALUE  
In reverse of FIRST_VALUE, it return the value from the last row in a 
window based on the clause and assigned to all the rows of the same 
group:  
OUTPUT:  
ID FIRST_NAME  DESIGNATION  DEPARTMENT  SALARY  LAST_VALUE  
1009  Richard  Account 
Coordinator  Account  12000  1009  
1004  Joelly  Account 
Coordinator  Account  15000  1006  

1006  Carmiae  Account 
Coordinator  Account  15000  1006  
1005  Bob Accountant II  Account  20000  1005  
1008 Gally  Manager  Account  28000  1008  
1010  Sofia  Sales Coordnitor  Sales  20000  1010  
1002  Gordon  Marketing 
Manager  Sales  25000  1007  
1003  Gracie  Assistant 
Manager  Sales  25000  1007  
1007  Cellie  Assistant 
Manager  Sales  25000  1007  
1001  Jervis  Director of Sales  Sales  30000  1001  
Here, the first row has been assigned value 1009 but for the next two 
rows have assigned 1006 as both ids 1004 and 1006 have same salary 
15000.  
 
 
 
Hive Data Models:  
Hive organizes the data into the different data models  
 Database  
 Tables  
 Partitions  
 Buckets  or clusters  
 
1. Tables : 
● These tables are similar to the RDBMS database tables. We can 
perform filters, joins, projects, and union of the hive tables. All the 
data of a table is stored as a directory in HDFS.  
 

2. Partitions : 
● Here, Hive or ganizes tables tables into partitions for grouping 
similar types of data together based on the partition key .This makes 
it faster to do queries on slices of data  
● Hive partitions are used to split the larger table into several smaller 
parts based on one or m ultiple columns (partition key, for example, 
date, state e.t.c). This makes it faster to do queries on slices of data . 
● The hive partition is similar to table partitioning available in SQL 
server or any other RDBMS database tables.  
● When you load the data in to the partition table, Hive internally 
splits the records based on the partition key and stores each 
partition data into a sub -directory of tables directory on HDFS.  
●  The name of the directory would be partition key and it‟s value.  
 
 
 

3. Buckets : Bucketi ng is a storage technique that involves grouping or 
portioning data based on specific criteria, such as a column value or 
range of values. It is commonly used in Distributed storage  systems to 
optimize data processing and analytics tasks.  
● Buckets give ext ra structure to the data that may be used for 
efficient queries. The data present in partitions are further divided 
into buckets buckets for efficient querying  based on the hash 
function of a column in the table. These buckets are stored as a file 
in the p artition directory.  
● A join of two tables that are bucketed on the same columns, 
including the join column can be implemented as a Map -Side Join. 
Bucketing by used ID means we can quickly evaluate a user -based 
query by running it on a randomized sample of t he total set of 
users.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
EXAMPLE  (table,partition,bucket)  
 

Indexing  in HIVE:  
Indexing in Hive :These are pointers to particular column name of a 
table.  
 
 However,  the user has to manually  define  the Hive  index  
 Basically,  we are creating  the pointer  to particular  column  
name  of the table,  wherever  we are creating  Hive  index.  
 By using  the Hive  index  value  created  on the column  name,  
any Changes  made  to the column  present  in tables  are stored.  
 
Apache  Hive  index  Syntax  
Create  INDEX  < INDEX_NAME>  ON TABL E 
<TABLE_NAME(column  names)>  
ii. Create  an Indexing  in Hive  
However,  creating  a Apache  Hive  index  means  creating  a pointer  on a 
particular  column  of a table.  So, to create  an indexing  in hive.  
Apache  Hive  Index  Syntax  is: 

 
 
CREATE INDEX index_nameON TABLE base_table_name (col_name, ...)AS 
'index.handler.class.name'[WITH DEFERRED REBUILD][IDXPROPERTIES 
(property_name=property_value, ...)][IN 
TABLEindex_table_name][PARTITIONED BY (col_name, ...)]  
[ [ ROW FORMAT ...] STORED AS ... | STORED BY ...  
][LOCATION hd fs_path][TBLPROPERTIES (...)]  
 
Example:  
 create  an index  named  index_salary  on the salary  column  of the 
employee  table.  
Hence,  we use the following  query  to create  a Hive  index:  
 
hive>  CREATE  INDEX  inedx_salary  ON TABLE  employee(salary)  
AS‘org.apache.hadoo p.hive.ql.index.compact.CompactIndexHandl e
r’; 
 
However,  it is a pointer  to the salary  column.  Basically,  the changes  are 
stored  using  an index  value,  if the column  is modified.  
 
When  to use Hive  Indexing  
Under  the following  circumstances,  we can use Indexi ng in Hive:  
 While  the dataset  is very large.  
 Whenever  the query  execution  takes  more  amount  of time than 
you expected.  
 While  we need  a speedy  query  execution.  
 While  we build  a data model.  
 
Hive Index is maintained in a separate table.  Hence, it won‟t affec t the 
data inside the table, which contains the data.   
 
