 
 
BIG DATA  ANALYTICS  
UNIT -IV 
 
 
SPARK  BASICS : History  of Spark,  Spark  Ecosystem,  Spark  
Architecture, Spark Shell, Working with RDDs in Spark: RDD Basics,  
Creating RDDs in Spark, RDD Operations, Passing Functions to Spark,  
Transformations  and Actions  in Spark, Spark  RDD  Persistence  
Working with Key/Value Pairs: Pair RDDs, Transformations on Pair  
RDDs,  Actions  Available  on Pair RDDs  
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  TO APACHE  SPARK:  
 Apache  Spark  is an open -source  in-memory  cluster  
computing framework, used for Storing & proces sing the  
Real time data  . 
 Its primary purpose is to handle the real-time generated  
data . 
 Spark copies most of the data from a physical server on to a  
RAM . This is called the “in memory “operation . Due to its  
in-memory  cluster  computing  Feature it increase s the 
processing  speed  of an application.  

 Spark   applies   Hadoop   in   two   forms.   The   first   form  
is STORAGE and another one is PROCESSING. Thus, spark  
includes  its computation  for cluster  management  and 
applies  Hadoop  for only storage  purposes.  
 Spark  was built on the top of the  Hadoop  MapReduce.  
 It was optimized  to run in memory  whereas  alternative  
approaches  like Hadoop's  MapReduce  writes  data to and 
from  computer  hard drives.  So, Spark processes  the data 
much  quicker  than other  alternatives.  
 Spark is designed to cover a wide range of workloads such as  
batch  applications,  iterative  algorithms,  interactive  queries  
and streaming.  
 Spark is simple due to it could be used for more than one  
thing such as working with data streams or graphs, machine  
learning algorithms, inhaling data into the database, building  
data pipelines,  executing distributed  sql, and others.  
 
 
History  of Spark:  
 
 

 Spark started in 2009 as a research project in the UC(University of  
California)  Berkeley  RAD Lab,  later to become  the AMPLab. 
 The researchers in the lab had previously been working on Hadoop  
MapReduce,  and observed  that MapReduce  was inefficient  for 
iterative and interactive computing jobs. Thus, from the beginning,  
Spark was designed to be fast for interactive queries and iterative  
algorithms, bringing in ideas like support for in -memory storage  
and efficient  fault recovery. 
 Soon  after its creation  it was already  10–20× faster  than 
MapReduce  for certain  jobs.
 Some of Spark‟s first users were other groups inside UC Berkeley,  
including  machine  learning  researchers  such as the Mobile  
Millennium  project,  which  used Spark  to monitor  and predict  
traffic  congesti on in the  San Francisco Bay  Area.
 Spark  was first open  sourced  in March  2010  under  a BSD  
license.
 In 2013,  the project  was acquired  by Apache  Software  
Foundation. 
 In 2014,  the Spark  emerged  as a Top -Level  Apache Project. 
 In addition  to UC Berkeley,  major  contributors  to Spark  include
Databricks , Yahoo!,  and Intel.  
 In 2014  it became  the Apache  Top level  Project  and its used by
Databricks  to set a world  record  in Large  scale  Sorting.  
 Internet  powerhouses  such as Netflix,  Yahoo,  and eBay  have  
deployed Spark at  massive scale, collectively processing multiple  
petabytes of data on clusters of over 8,000 nodes. It has quickly  
become the largest open source community in big data, with over  
1000  contributors  from  250+  organizations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why  Spark?  
 Spark is used to cache data in memory across multiple parallel  
operations. 
 it is much  faster  than MapReduce,  which  requires  more  disc 
reading  and writing.  Spark  has a faster  startup  time,  higher  
parallelism, and  better  CPU  utilization today. 
 Spark uses a more robust fun ctional programming method than  
MapReduce. 
 Spark is particularly well -suited to iterative algorithms that process  
large  amounts  of data in parallel. 

FEATURES  OF SPARK:  
 
 
 
 
 
 High  Processing  Speed : Apache  Spark  helps  in the achievement  
of a very high proce ssing speed of data by reducing read -write  
operations  to disk.  The speed  is almost  100x  faster  while  
performing  in-memory  computation  and 10x faster  while  
performing  disk computation. 
 Dynamic Nature : Spark provides 80 high -level operators which  
help in the easy development  of parallel  applications. 
 In-Memory  Computation : The in-memory computation feature  
of Spark due to its DAG execution engine increases the speed of  
data processing. This also supports data caching and reduces the  
time required  to fetch  data from  the disk.
 Reusability : Spark codes can be reused for batch -processing, data  
streaming,  running  ad-hoc queries,  etc.
 Fault  Tolerance : Spark  supports  fault tolerance  using  RDD.  
Spark RDDs are the abstractions designed to handle failures of  
worker  node s which  ensures  zero data loss.

 Stream  Processing : Spark  supports  stream  processing  in real- 
time.  The problem  in the earlier  MapReduce  framework  was that 
it could  process  only already  existing  data.
 Lazy Evaluation : Spark transformations done using Spark  RDDs  
are lazy.  Meaning,  they do not generate  results  right  away,  but 
they create new RDDs from existing RDD. This lazy evaluation  
increases  the system  efficiency. 
 Support Multiple Languages : Spark supports multiple languages  
like R, Scala, Python, Java wh ich provides  dynamicity and  helps  
in overcoming the Hadoop limitation of application development  
only using  Java.
 Cost  Efficiency : Apache  Spark  is considered  a better  cost- 
efficient solution when compared to Hadoop as Hadoop required  
large  storage  and data centers  while  data processing  and 
replication. 
 Real -Time : 
It offers Real -time computation & low latency because of  in-memory 
computation. 

 
Spark  Ecosystem/Components:  
 

 Apache  Spark  ecosystem  is built on top of the core execution  
engine  that has extens ible API‟s in  different  languages. 
 
1) Scala   
Spark  framework  is built on Scala,  so programming  in Scala  for 
Spark  can provide  access  to some  of the latest  and greatest  features  that 
might  not be available  in other  supported  programming  spark  languages.  
2) Python   
Python  language  has excellent  libraries  for data analysis  like Pandas  and 
Sci-Kit learn  but is comparatively  slower  than Scala.   
3) R Language   
R programming  language has  rich environment for machine  learning and  
statistical  analysis  which  helps  increase  developer  productivity.  Data  
scientist s can now use R language  along  with Spark  through  SparkR  for 
processing  data that cannot  be handled  by a single  machine.   
 
 
 
Spark  Components   
 
The Apache  Spark  components  include:   
 
 





Spark  Core   
Spark  SQL  
Spark  Streaming   
MLlib(Machine  learning  library)   
GraphX   
Spark  R 
 
 
 
Spark  core:  
 
Spark  Core  component  is accountable  for all the basic  I/O 
Functionalitie s. It is responsible for memory 
management and fau lt recovery, scheduling, 
distributing and monitoring jobs on a cluster & 
interacting with storage systems.  

  
  
Spark  Core  makes  use of a special  data structure  known  as 
RDD  (Resilient  Distributed  Datasets).  Data  sharing  or reuse  
in distribut ed computing  systems  like Hadoop  MapReduce  
requires  the data to be stored  in intermediate  stores  like 
HDFS.  This slows  down  the overall  computation  speed  
because  of several  replications,  IO operations  and 
serializations  in storing  the data in these intermediate  stable  
data stores.  Resilient  Distributed  Datasets  overcome  this 
drawback  of Hadoop  MapReduce  by allowing  - fault tolerant  
„in-memory‟  computations.   
Spark  SQL:  
 
 
 
 
 

 On the top of spark,  spark  SQL enables  users  to run SQL/HQL  
queries.  

 
 

 
 
Spark  developers  can leverage  the power  of declarative  queries  and 
optimized  storage  by running  SQL  like queries  on Spark  data, that 
is present  in RDDs  and other  external sources.   
Users  can perform,  extract,  transform  and load functions  on the 
data coming  from  various  formats  like JSON  or Parquet  or Hive  
and then run ad-hoc queries  using  Spark  SQL.   
Spark  SQL  eases  the process  of extracting  and merging  various  
datasets  so that the datasets  are ready to  use for machine learning.   
 We can process structured as well as semi -structured data, by using  
spark  SQL.
 Moreover,  it offers  to run unmodified  queries  up to 100 times  
faster  on existing deployments. 
Spark  streaming:  
 

Spark  Streaming    is a light weight API that allows developers to  
perform batch processing and streaming of data with ease, in the  
same  application. 
 It makes use of a continuous stream of input data (Discretized  
Stream  or Stream - a series  of RDD‟s) to  process  data in real -time.
 Spark Streaming leverages the fast scheduling capacity of Apache  
Spark Core to perform streaming analytics by ingesting data in  
mini-batches.
 Transformations  are applied  on those  mini batches  of data.
  Data in Spark Streaming is ingested from various data sources and  
live streams  like Twitter,  IoT Sensors,  Apache  Flume,  etc.






Spark  streaming  finds  great  applications  in Log processing,  
Intrusion  Detection  and Fraud  Detection.   
 
Spark  MLlib:  
 
 Mach ine learning  library  delivers  both efficiencies  as well as the 
high-quality  algorithms.  

 
 

 
MLlib  is simple  to use, scalable,  compatible  with various  
programming  languages  and can be easily  integrated  with other  
tools.   
MLlib  eases  the deployme nt and development  of scalable  machine  
learning  pipelines.   
MLlib  library  has implementations  for various  common  machine  
learning  algorithms  –  Spark  streaming  is used in applications  that require  real-time 
statistics  and rapid  response  like alarms,  IoT sensors,  diagnostics,  
cyber security,  etc.  
 
 
. Classification  – naïve  Bayes,  logistic  regression,  SVM   
. Regression  –Linear  Regression   
   
 Moreover,  it is the best choice for a  data scientist. Since  it is capable  of 
in-memory  data processing,  that improves  the performance  of iterative  
algorithm  drastically. 
Spark  graphx:  
 GraphX  is the newest  component  in Spark.
 It is the graph computation  engine  built on top of apache  spark  that 
enables  to process graph data  at scale.
 It‟s a directed  multigraph,  which means  it contains  both edges  and 
vertices and can be used to represent a wide range of data  
structures. 
 It includes  a growing  collection  of algorithms  that help you 
analyze your  data
 
. Clustering - K-means   
SparkR:  
 SparkR  is an R package  that provides  a light-weight  frontend  to 
use Apache  Spark  from  R.
 SparkR exposes the Spark API through the RDD class and allows  
users  to interactively  run jobs  from  the R shell  on a cluster.
 Moreover,  it allows  data scientists  to analyze  large  datasets.
 Although, the main idea behind sparkr was to explore different  
techniques to integrate the usability of R with the scalability of  
spark.

 
Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD)  
RDDs are the building blocks of any Spark application. RDDs Stands for:  
 
Resilient:  Fault tolerant and is capable of rebuilding data on failure  
Distributed:  Distributed data among the multiple nodes in a cluster  
Dataset:  Collection of partitioned dat a with values  
 
 
It is a layer of abstracted data over the distributed collection. It is immutable in nature and 
follows lazy transformations.

Spark  Architecture:  
 The Apache  Spark  framework  uses a master -slave  architecture. 
 Its cluster consists of a single  master and multiple slaves in which  
consists of a driver, which runs as a  master node,  and many  
executors that run across as worker nodes(Slave nodes) in the  
cluster.
 Apache  Spark  can be used for batch  processing  and real-time 
processing  as well.
 The   spark    architecture    depends    upon    two    abstractions: 
 
Resilient Distributed Dataset(RDD)  
Directed  Acyclic  Graph  (DAG)  
 
• Resilient  distributed  datasets  (RDD):  RDD is an immutable  
(read -only),  fundamental  collection  of elements  or items  that can 
be operated  on many  devices  at the same  time (spark  parallel  
processing ). once you create an RDD it becomes immutable. By 
immutable I mean, an object whose state cannot be modified after 
it is created, but they can surely be transformed.  Each dataset in an 
RDD can be divided into logical  portions,  which are  then executed 
on different  nodes  of a cluster.  
• The resilient distributed datasets are the group of data items that  
can be stored  in-memory  on worker nodes.  Here,  
• Resilient:  restore  the data on failure.  
• Distributed:  data is distributed  among  different  nodes.  
• Dataset:  group  of data  
           

There are two ways to create RDDs − parallelizing an existing collection in your driver 
program, or by referencing a dataset in an external storage system, such as a shared file system, 
HDFS, HBase, etc.  
 
With RDDs, you can perform two types of operations:  
 
Transformations:  They are the operations that are applied to create a new RDD.  
Actions:  They are applied on an RDD to instruct Apache Spark to app ly computation and pass 
the result back to the driver.  
 
Directed  acyclic  graph  (DAG):  
 DAG  is a finite  direct  graph  that performs  a sequence  of 
computations  on data.
 (Directed  Acyclic  Graph)  DAG in  Apache   Spark  is   a   set 
of Vertices and Edges,   where vertices represent   the RDDs and  
the edges  represent  the Operation  to be applied on RDD. 
 In Spark  DAG,  every  edge  directs  from  earlier  to later in the 
sequence. 
 On the calling  of Action, the created  DAG  submits  to DAG  
Scheduler  which  further  splits  the graph into the  stages  of the  task.
 The Scheduler  splits  the Spark  RDD  into stages  based  on various  
transformation  applied.
 Each  stage  is comprised  of tasks , based  on the partitions  of the 
RDD, which will  perform  same  computation  in parallel.
  The graph  here refers  to navigation,  and directed  and acyclic  
refers  to how  it is done.
Working  on the Apache  Spark  Architecture:  
 
 
 
 
 Driver Program in  the Apache  Spark  architecture calls  the main 
program  of an application and creates  SparkContext. 
 A SparkContext  consists  of all the basic  functionalities.  Spark  
Driver contains various other components such as DAG Scheduler,  
Task  Scheduler,  Backend  Scheduler,  and Block  Manager,  which  
are responsibl e for translating  the user-written  code  into jobs that 
are actually executed on  the cluster.
 Spark Driver and SparkContext collectively watch over the job  
execution  within  the cluster.

  Spark Driver works with the Cluster Manager to manage various  
other  jobs.
 The cluster Manager does the resource allocating work. And then,  
the job is split into multiple  smaller  tasks  which  are further  
distributed  to worker  nodes.
 Whenever  an RDD  is created  in the SparkContext,  it can be 
distributed  across  many  worker  nodes  and can also be cached  
there.
 Worker nodes execute the tasks assigned by the Cluster Manager  
and return  it back  to the Spark  Context.
 An executor  is responsible  for the execution  of these  tasks.
 The lifetime  of executors  is the same  as that of the Spark  
Application. If we want to increase the performance of the system,  
we can increase the number of workers so that the jobs can be  
divided  into more  logical  portions.
 
Driver  Program:  
 The Driver Program is  a process  that runs the main() function  of 
the applica tion and creates the SparkContext object. The purpose  
of SparkContext  is to coordinate  the spark  applications,  running  
as independent  sets of processes  on a cluster.
 To run on a cluster, the SparkContext connects to a different type  
of cluster  managers  and then perform  the following  tasks:  -
• It acquires executors  on nodes  in the cluster.  
• Then, it sends your application code to the executors. Here,  
the application code can be defined by JAR or Python files  
passed  to the SparkContext.  
• At last, the  SparkConte xt sends  tasks  to the executors  to run. 
Cluster  Manager:  
 The role of  the cluster  manager is  to allocate  resources across  
applications. The Spark is capable enough of running on a large  
number of  clusters.
 It consists of various types of cluster managers su ch as Hadoop  
YARN, Apache  Mesos  and Standalone  Scheduler. 
 Here,  the Standalone  Scheduler  is a standalone  spark  cluster  
manager  that facilitates  to install  Spark  on an empty  set of 
machines. 
Worker  Node:  
 The worker node  is a slave  node
 Its role is to run th e application  code  in the cluster.
Executor:  
 An executor  is a process  launched  for an application  on a worker  
node.
 It runs tasks  and keeps  data in memory  or disk storage  across  them.
 It read and write data  to the external  sources.
 Every  application  contai ns its executor.
Task:  
 A unit of work  that will be sent to one executor. 
 
     
 
STEP 1:  
 The client submits spark user application code.  
 When an application code is submitted, the driver implicitly converts user code that 
contains transformations and ac tions into a logically dir ected acyclic graph called DAG.  
 At this stage, it also performs optimizations such as pipelining transformations.  
 
STEP 2:  
 After that, it converts the logical graph called DAG into physical execution plan with 
many stages.  
 After  converting into a physical execution plan, it creates physical execution units called 
tasks under each stage.  
 Then the tasks are bundled and sent to the cluster.  
 
STEP 3:  
 Now the driver talks to the cluster manager and negotiates the resources.  
 Cluster  manager launches executors in worker nodes on behalf of the driver.  
 At this point, the driver will send the tasks to the executors based on data placement.  
 When executors start, they register themselves with drivers. So, the driver will have a 
complete v iew of executors that are executing the task.  
 
 
 

 
 
STEP 4:   
 During the course of execution of tasks, driver program will monitor the set of 
executors that runs.  
 Driver node also schedules future tasks based on data placement.  
 
 
SCALA:  
 Scala  is a general -purpose,  high-level,  multi -paradigm  
programming  language. 
 It is a pure object -oriented  programming  language  which  also 
provides  the support  to the functional  programming  approach. 
  There  is no concept  of primitive  data as everything  is an object  in 
Scala.
 It is designed  to express  the general  programming  patterns  in a 
refined,  succinct,  and type -safe way.
 Scala  programs  can convert  to bytecodes  and can run on the 
JVM (Java  Virtual  Machine) .
 Scala  stands  for Scalable  language. 
 

 
 

Spark  Shell:  
 The shell acts  as an interface to  access  the operating  system‟s  
service.
 Apache Spark is shipped with an interactive shell/scala prompt  
with the interactive  shell  we can run different  commands  to 
process the  data.
 we can create RDDs and perform  various  transformations  and 
actions  like filter(),  partitions(),  cache(),  count(),  collect,  etc.
Scala  – Spark  Shell  Commands:  
 Apache Spark is ship ped with an interactive shell/scala prompt, as  
the spark is developed in Scala . Using the interactive shell we will  
run different commands  (RDD transformation/action ) to process  
the data.


 The command  to start the Apache  Spark  Shell:
$bin/spark -shell  
 
 Create a  new RDD:
a) Read  File from  local  filesystem  and create an RDD.  
scala>  val data =  sc.textFile(“data.txt”)  
 sc is the object  of SparkContext 
 
 Create  an RDD through  Parallelized  Collection: 
scala>  val no = Array(1,  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10) 
scala>  val noData  = sc.parallelize(no)  
 From  Existing RDDs: 
scala>  val newRDD  = no.map(data  => (data  * 2)) 
These  are three  methods  to create  the RDD . We can use the first  
method, when data is already available with the external systems l ike a  
local  filesystem,  HDFS , HBase , etc. One can create  an RDD  by calling  
a textFile method of Spark Context with path / URL as the argument.  
The second approach can be used with the existing collections and th e 
third  one is a way to create new  RDD  from  the existing one.  
 
 Number  of Items  in the RDD:
Count the number of items available in the RDD. To count the items we  
need  to call an Action:  
 
scala>  data.count()  
 Filter  Operation: 


Filter  the RDD  and create  new RDD  of items  which  contain  word  
“hello”. To filter, we need to call transformation filter, which will return  
a new RDD  with subset  of items.  
 
scala>  val DFData  = data.filter  (line  => line.contains(“hello”))  
 

 
 Transformation  and Action  together:
For complex requirements, we can chain multiple operations together  
like filter  (transformation)  and count  (action)  together:  
scala>  data.filter(line  => line.contains(“Hello”)).count()[/php]  
 
 
 Read  the first item from  the RDD:
To read the first item from  the file, you can  use the following  command:  
scala>  data.first()  
 Read  the first 5 item from  the RDD:
To read the first 5 item from  the file, you can use the following  
command:  
 
scala>  data.take(5)  
 RDD  Partitions: 
 
An RDD is made  up of multiple  partitions,  to count  the number  of 
partitions:  
 
scala>  data.partitions.length  
The Minimum no. of partitions in the RDD is 2 (by default). When we  
create RDD from HDFS file then a number of blocks will be equals to  
the number  of partitions.  
 
 
 Read  Data  from  HDFS  file:
To read data from  HDFS file  we can specify  complete  hdfs URL  
like hdfs://IP:PORT/PATH  
scala>  var hFile  = sc.textFile(“hdfs://localhost:9000/inp”)  
 write the data to HDFS file  
To write the data from HFDS:  
[Php]scala> wc.Saveastextfile(“hdfs://localhost:9000/out”)[/php]  
CREATION  OF RDD  in SPARK:   
 
 
 Parallelized  Collection 
 External  Datasets
 From  Existing  RDD’s
 
Parallelized  Collection:  
 To create parallelized collection, call  sparkcontext's  parallelize method on 
an existing collection  in the driver program. Each element of collection is 
copied to form a distributed dataset that can be operated on in parallel.  
 RDDs  can be created  generally  by the parallelizing method. 

 It is possible  by taking  an existing  collection  from  our driver  
program.

 Driver  program  such as Scala,  Python,  Java.  Also  by calling the  
sparkcontext ‟s parallelize( )  method  on it.
 This is a basic  method  to create  RDD which  is applied  at the very 
initial  stage  of spark.
 It creates  RDD  very quickly. It  also initializes  further  operations  
on them  at the same  time.
 To operate  this method,  we need  entire  dataset  on one machine.
Example:  Val info = array(1,  2, 3, 4) 
Val distinfo  = sc.Parallelize(info)  
Now,  we can operate  the distributed  dataset  (distinfo)  parallel  such like 
distinfo.Reduce((a, b)  => a + b). 
 
 
 
 External  Datasets
 In Spark, the distributed datasets can be created from any type of 
storage sources supported by Hadoop such as HDFS, Cassandra, 
HBase and even our local file system. Spark provides the support for 
text files,  SequenceFiles , and other types of Hadoop  InputFormat . 
 SparkContext's  textFile method can be used to create RDD's text file. 
This method takes a URI for the file (either a local path on the machine 
or a hdfs://) and reads the data of the file.  
  
 If any storage  source  supported  by Hadoop,  including  our local  file 
system(HDFS,HBase,Hive)  it can create  RDDs  from  it.
 Apache  spark  does support  sequence  files,  textfiles,  and any other  
Hadoop  input  format.
 We can create  textfile  RDDs  by sparkcontext‟s  textfile  method.
 It also reads  whole  as a collection of  lines.
 Always  be careful that the path of the local system and worker  
node should always be similar. The file shoul d be available at the  
same  place  in the local  file system  and worker  node.

 To load a dataset from an external storage system, we can use data  
frame  reader  interface.  External  storage  system  such as file 
systems,  key-value  stores.  It supports  many  file formats  
like(JSON,Text  file,CSV  file etc)

 
val words=spark.sparkContext.parallelize(Seq("sun",  "rises",  "in", "the",  
"east",  "and",  "sets",  "in", “the”,  "west"))  
val wordPair  = words.map(w  => (w.charAt(0),  w)) 
wordPair.foreach(println)   
 From  Existing  RDD’s:
 As RDD is immutable so, we can not change anything to it. So we  
can create  different  RDD  from  the existing RDDs. 
 This process of creating another dataset from the existing ones  
means  transformat ion.
 As a result,  transformation  always produces  new RDD.
 As they are immutable,  no changes  take place  in it if once  created.
 This property  maintains  the consistency  over the cluster.
 Some of the operations performed on RDD are map,  filter, count,  
distinct , flatmap etc. 
For Example:  
In this example,  we are providing  a text file which  returns  Dataset  of the  
string  as a result.  
 
 
 
 
 
RDD  Operations  (Passing  Functions  To Spark,  Transformations  
And Actions In  Spark):  
• The RDD provide s the two types  of operations:  
• Transformation  
• Action  
Transformation  
In spark, the role of transformation is to create a new dataset from an  
existing  one. The transformations  are considered  lazy as they only 
computed when an action requires a result to be r eturned to the driver  
program.  
Let's  see some  of the frequently  used RDD  transformations.  
 
 
 
 
Transformation  Description  
map(func)  It returns  a new distributed  dataset  formed  by 
passing  each element  of the source  through  a 
function  func.  
filter(func)  It returns  a new dataset  formed  by selecting  those  
elements  of the source  on which  func returns  true.  
In the above  example  RDD  “wordPair”  is created  from  existing  RDD  
“word” using map ( ) transformation. This result contains word and  
starting  character  together  of the same  word.  
flatMap(func)  Here, each input item can be mapped to zero or  
more  output  items,  so func should  return  a 
sequence  rather  than a  single  item.  
mapPartitions( func)  It is similar to map, but runs separately on each  
partition (block) of the RDD, so func must be of  
type Iterator<T> => Iterator<U> when running on  
an RDD  of type T. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapPartitionsWithIndex(func)  It is similar  to mapPartitions  that 
provides func with an integer value  
representing  the index  of the 
partition,  so func must  be of type 
(Int, Iterator<T>)  => Iterator<U>  
when  running  on an RDD  of type T. 
sample(withReplacement,  fraction,  
seed)  It samples the fraction fraction of the  
data,  with or without  replacement,  
using  a given  random  number  
generator  seed.  
union(otherDataset)  It returns a new dataset that contains  
the union  of the elements  in the 
source  dataset  and the argument.  
intersection(otherDataset)  It returns a new RDD that contains  
the intersection  of elements  in the 
source  dataset  and the argument.  
 
 
 
distinct([numPartitions]))  It returns  a new dataset  that 
contains the distinct elements of the  
source  dataset.  
groupByKey([numPartitions])  It returns a dataset of (K, Iterable)  
pairs  when called  on a dataset  of 
(K, V) pairs.  
reduceByKey(func,  
[numPartitions])  When called on a dataset of (K, V)  
pairs,  returns  a dataset  of (K, V) 
pairs where the values for each key  
are aggregated  using  the given  
reduce  function  func,  which  must  
be of type (V,V)  => V. 
aggregateByKey(zeroValue)(seqOp,  
combOp,  [numPartitions])  When called on a dataset of (K, V)  
pairs,  returns  a dataset  of (K, U) 
pairs where the values for each key  
are aggregated  using  the given  
combine  functions  and a neutral  
"zero" value.  
sortByKey([ascending],  
[numPartitions])  It returns  a dataset  of key-value  
pairs sorted by keys in ascending or  
descending order, as specified in the  
boolean  ascending  argument.  
join(otherDataset,  [numPartitions])  When called on datasets of type (K,  
V) and (K, W), returns a dataset of  
(K, (V, W)) pairs with all pairs of  
elements for each key. Outer joins  
are supported through leftOuterJoin,  
rightOuterJoin,  and fullOuterJoin.  
cogroup(otherDataset,  
[numPartitions])  When called on datasets of type (K,  
V) an d (K, W), returns a dataset of  
(K, (Iterable, Iterable)) tuples. This  
operation  is also called  groupWith.  
cartesian(otherDataset)  When called on datasets of types T  
and U, returns a dataset of (T, U)  
pairs  (all pairs  of elements).  
 
 
 
pipe(command,  [envVa rs]) Pipe each partition of the  
RDD  through  a shell  
command,  e.g. a Perl or 
bash script.  
coalesce(numPartitions)  It decreases the number of  
partitions  in the RDD  to 
numPartitions.  
repartition(numPartitions)  It reshuffles the data in the  
RDD  randomly  to create  
either  more  or fewer  
partitions  and balance  it 
across them.  
repartitionAndSortWithinPartitions(partitioner)  It repartition  the RDD  
according  to the given  
partitioner  and, within  
each resulting  partition,  
sort records  by their  keys.  
 
 
Action:  
In Spark, the role of action  is to return  a value  to the driver  program  
after running a  computation on the  dataset.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Action  Description  
reduce(func)  It aggregate the  elements of  the dataset using a  
function  func (which  takes  two arguments  and 
returns one) . The function should be commutative  
and associative so that it can be computed correctly  
in parallel.  
collect()  It returns all the elements of the dataset as an array  
at the driver program. This is usually useful after a  
filter or other operation that r eturns a sufficiently  
small  subset  of the data.  
count()  It returns  the number  of elements in  the dataset.  
first()  It returns  the first element  of the dataset  (similar  to 
take(1)).  
take(n)  It returns  an array  with the first n elements  of the 
dataset.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
takeSample(withReplacement,  num,  
[seed])  It returns  an array  with a 
random  sample  of num 
elements of the dataset, with or  
without replacement, optionally  
pre-specifying  a random  
number generator  seed.  
takeOrdered(n,  [ordering])  It returns the first n elements of  
the RDD  using  either  their 
natural  order  or a custom  
 comparator.  
saveAsTextFile(path)  It is used to write the elements  
of the dataset as a text file (or  
set of text files)  in a given  
directory  in the local  
filesystem, HDFS or any ot her 
Hadoop -supported  file system.  
Spark  calls toString  on each 
element to convert it to a line of  
text in the file. 
saveAsSequenceFile(path)  
(Java  and Scala)  It is used to write the elements  
of the dataset  as a Hadoop  
SequenceFile in a given path in  
the l ocal filesystem, HDFS or  
any other  Hadoop -supported  
file system.  
saveAsObjectFile(path)  
(Java  and Scala)  It is used to write the elements  
of the dataset  in a simple  
format using Java serialization,  
which  can then be loaded  
usingSparkContext.objectFile().  
countByKey()  It is only available on RDDs of  
type (K, V). Thus, it returns a  
hashmap of (K, Int) pairs with  
the count  of each  key. 
foreach(func)  It runs a function func on each  
element of the dataset for side  
effects  such as updating  an 
Accumulator  or interacting  
with external  storage  systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
Spark  RDD  Persistence:  
 
 Spark RDD  persistence is an optimization technique in which  
saves  the result of RDD  evaluation. 
 Using this we s ave the intermediate result so that we can use it  
further  if required.  It reduces  the computation  overhead. 
 We can make  persisted  RDD
through  cache()  and persist()  methods.  
 When we use the cache() method we can store all the RDD in - 
memory.
 We can persist  the RDD  in memory  and use it efficiently  across  
parallel  operations. 

 The difference  between  cache()  and persist()  is that using  
cache() the default storage level is MEMORY_ONLY while using  
persist() we can use various storage levels .It is a key tool for an 
interactive algorithm. Because, when we persist RDD each node  
stores any partition of it that it computes in memory and makes it  
reusable for future use. This process speeds up the further  
computation ten times. 
 
Storage  levels  of Persisted  RDDs  
Using  persist() we can use various  storage  levels  to Store  Persisted  
RDDs  in Apache  Spark.  
 
 
a. MEMORY_ONLY  
 In this storage  level,  RDD  is stored  as deserialized  Java object  in 
the JVM.   
 If the size of RDD is greater than memory, It will not cache some  
partition and  recompute  them  next time whenever  needed.  
 In this level the space used for storage is very high, the CPU  
computation time is low, the data is stored in -memory. It does not  
make  use of the disk.  
 
b. MEMORY_AND_DISK  
 In this level,  RDD  is stored  as deserialized  Java object  in the JVM.  
 When the size of RDD is greater than the size of memory, it stores  
the excess partition on the disk, and retrieve from disk whenever  
required.  
 In this level  the space  used for storage  is high,  the CPU  
computation time is medium, it  makes use of both in -memory and  
on disk storage.  
 
c. MEMORY_ONLY_SER  
 This level  of Spark  store  the RDD  as serialized  Java object  (one- 
byte array  per partition).  It is more  space  efficient  as compared  to 
deserialized  objects,  especially  when  it uses fast se rializer.  
 But it increases  the overhead on  CPU.  
 In this level the storage space is low, the CPU computation time is  
high and the data is stored in -memory. It does not make use of the  
disk.  
 
d. DISK_ONLY  
 In this storage  level,  RDD  is stored only  on disk.  
 The space used for storage  is low, the CPU  computation  time is 
high and it  makes  use of on  disk storage.  
 
How  to Unpersist  RDD  in Spark  
 Spark  monitor  the cache  of each node  automatically  and drop out 
the old data partition in the  LRU  (least  recently  used)  fashi on. 
 LRU  is an algorithm  which  ensures the  least frequently used data.  
 It spills  out that data from  the cache.  
 We can also remove  the cache  manually  
using RDD.unpersist()  method.  
Working  with  Key/Value  Pairs:  Pair RDDs,  Transformations  on 
Pair RDDs,  Action s Available  on Pair RDDs  
 Spark provides special types of operations on RDDs that contain  
key/value pairs (Paired RDDs). These operations are called paired  
RDDs  operations.  Paired  RDDs  are a useful  building  block  in 
many  programming  languages,  as they expose  operations  that 
allow us to act on each key operation in parallel or re -group data  
across the  network.  
 Transformations and actions in spark RDD. Here transformation  
operations  are groupB yKey,  reduceByKey,  join, left outer  
join/right OuterJoin. Whereas actions like countByKey. However  
initially,  we will  learn  a brief introduction  to spark  RDDs.  
 So, let‟s start spark  paired  RDD tutorial.  
 
 
 
 

 Spark Paired RDDs are nothing but RDDs containi ng a key -value  
pair. Basically, key -value pair (KVP) consists of a two linked data  
item in it. 
 Here,  the key is the identifier,  whereas  value  is the data 
corresponding  to the key value.  
 Moreover, Spark operations work on RDDs containing any type of  
objects . 
 However key -value pair RDDs attains few special operations in it.  
Such as, distributed “shuffle” operations, grouping or aggregating  
the elements  by a key. 
 In addition, on Spark Paired RDDs containing Tuple2 objects in  
Scala,  these  operations  are automat ically  available.  Basically,  
operations for the key -value pair are available in the Pair RDD  
functions  class.  
 However,  that wraps  around  a Spark  RDD  of tuples.  
 
 
How  to Create  Spark  Paired  RDD  
 There are several ways to create Paired RDD in Spark, like by  
running a map() function that returns key -value pairs. However,  
language  differs  the procedure  to build  the key-value  RDD.  Such  
as 
a. In Python  language  
It is a requirement  to return  an RDD  composed  of Tuples  for the 
functions of keyed data to work. Moreover, in spark for creating a pair  
RDD, we use the first word as the key in python programming language.  
pairs  = lines.map(lambda  x: (x.split(” “)[0],  x)) 
b. In Scala  language  
As similar to the previous example here also we need to return tuples.  
Furthermore, this  will make available the functions of keyed data. Also,  
to offer the extra key or value functions, an implicit conversion on Spark  
RDD  of tuples  exists.  
 Let’s revise Data type Mapping between R and Spark  
Afterward,  again  by using  the first word  as the keyw ord creating  
apache  spark  pair RDD.  
val pairs  = lines.map(x  => (x.split(”  “)(0),  x)) 
c. In Java  language  
 Basically, Java doesn‟t have a built -in function of tuple function.  
Therefore,  we can use the Scala.  
  It only sparks‟  Java API has users  create  tuples.Tup le2 class.  
However by, by writing new Tuple2(elem1, elem2) in Java, we can  
create a  new tuple.  
 Moreover,  we can access  its relevant  elements  with the _1() and 
_2() methods.  
 Moreover, when we create paired RDDs in Spark, it is must to call  
special  versions  of spark‟s  functions  in java.  As an example,  we 
can use mapToPair () function in place of the basic map() function.  
Again, here using the first word as the keyword to create a Spark  
paired  RDD,  
PairFunction<String,  String,  String>  keyData  = new 
PairFunctio n<String,  String,  String>()  
{ 
public  Tuple2<String,  String>  call(String  x) 
{ 
return  new Tuple2(x.split(”  “)[0],  x); 
} 
}; 
JavaPairRDD<String,  String>  pairs  = lines.mapToPair(keyData)  
 
 
Spark  Paired  RDD  Operations:  
A. Transformation  Operations  
 Paired RDD allow s the same transformation those are available to  
standard  RDDs.  
 Moreover, here also same rules apply from “passing functions to  
spark”.  
 Also in Spark, there are tuples available in paired RDDs. Basically,  
we need  to pass functions  that operate  on tuples,  despite  on 
individual  elements.  
 Let‟s  discuss  some  of the transformation methods  below,  like 
• groupByKey  
• The groupbykey operation  generally groups all the  values  
with the same  key. 
rdd.groupByKey()  
• reduceByKey(fun)  
Here,  the reduceByKey  operation  generally  combines  values  with the 
samekey.  
add.reduceByKey(  (x, y) => x + y) 
• combineByKey(createCombiner,  mergeValue,  mergeCombiners,  
partitioner)  
• CombineByKey  uses a different  result  type,  then combine  those  
values  with the  same  key. 
• mapValues(func)  
Even without changing the key, mapValues operation applies  a 
function  to each value  of a paired   RDD   of   spark.  
rdd.mapValues(x  => x+1)  
• keys()  
Keys() operation generally returns a spark RDD of just the keys.  
rdd.keys()  
• values()  
values() operation generally returns an RDD of just the values.  
rdd.values()  
• sortByKey()  
Similarly,  the sortByKey  operation  generally  returns  an RDD  sorted  by 
thekey.  
rdd.sortByKey()  
 
 
B. Actionoperations : 
As similar  as RDD  transformations,  there  are same  RDD  actions  
available on spark pair RDD.  However, paired rdds also attains some  
additional actions of spark. Basically, those leverages the advantage of  
data which  is of keyvalue  nature.  Let‟s  discuss  some  of the action  
methods  below,  like 
 
 
 countByKey()  
 
Through  countByKey  operation,  we can  count the number  of elements  
for each key. 
rdd.countByKey()  
 
 collectAsMap()  
 
Here,  collectAsMap()  operation helps  to collect  the result  as a map to 
provide  easy lookup.  
rdd.collectAsMap()  
 
 lookup(key)  
 
Moreover,  it returns  all values  associated  with the provided key. 
rdd.lookup()  
