 
 
 
 
              BIG DATA  ANALYTICS  
 
    UNIT - I 
INTRODUCTION TO BIG DATA:  Big Data Analytics, Characteristics 
of Big Data – The Four Vs, importance of Big Data, Different Use cases, 
Data -Structured, Semi -Structured, Un -Structured , Introduction to Hadoop 
and its use in Solving big Data Problems. Comparison of Hadoop with 
RDBMS, Brief History of Hadoop, Apache Hadoop Ecosystem, 
Components of  Hadoop,  The Hadoop Distributed File System( HDFS), 
Architecture and Design of HDFS in detail, Working with 
HDFS(Commands)  
 
INTRODUCTION : 
With the fruition of the online services through the extensive use of the 
Internet, have fundamentally transformed various aspects of society, 
including businesses, economies, governments, and individual lifestyles. 
With the increase in all of these  the transformation has indeed led to an 
explosion in data generation and collection . Thus creating a need for 
effective mechanisms to handle and derive value from this vast amount of 
information. This is where the concept of  Big Data  comes into play.   
Data : 
• Data is nothing but facts and statistics stored or free flowing over a 
network,  generally it's raw and unprocessed.  
• When data are processed, organized, structured or presented in a 
given context so as to make them useful, they are called Information.  
 
 
 
 
  
What is Big Data? – 
➢ The term  Big Data  refers to a huge volume of data that cannot be stored 
processed by any traditional data storage or processing units.   
➢ In short  such data is so large and complex that none of the traditional 
data management tools  are able to store it or process it efficiently.  
➢ The data of size MB(WordDoc ,Excel) or maximum GB(Movies, 
Codes), is termed as normal data range, but data in Peta bytes  i.e. 10^15 
byte size  & beyond  is termed as Big Data.  
➢ Today, there are millions of data sources  that generate data at a very 
rapid rate. These data sources are present across the world. Some of the 
largest sources of data are social media platforms and networks. For  
example  Facebook —it generates more than 500 terabytes of data every 
day. This data includes pictures, videos, messages, and more .  
➢ Data also exists in different formats, like structured data, semi -structured 
data, and unstructured data. For example, in a regular Excel sheet, data 
is classified as structured data —with a definite format. In contrast, 
emails fall under semi -structured, a nd your pictures and videos fall under 
unstructured data. All this data combined makes up Big Data.  
 
 
Other Definition:  Big data  is a term that is used to describe data that is 
high volume, high velocity, or high variety, which requires new 
technologies and techniques to capture, store, and analyze it . 
 
 
Example of Big Data:  
 
Following are some of the Big Data examples - 
 
 
 
 
 ➢ Stock Exchange Data : The New York Stock Exchange  is an 
example of Big Data that  generates about  one terabyte  of new trade 
data per day.  
➢ Social Media : The statistic shows that  500+terabytes  of new data 
get ingested into the databases of social media site  Facebook , every 
day. This data is mainly generated in terms of photo and video 
uploads, message exchanges, posts submitted by millions of people 
worldwide etc.  
➢ A single  Jet engine  can generate  10+terabytes  of data in  30 
minutes  of flight time. With many thousand flights per day, 
generation of data reaches up to many  Petabytes.  
➢ Search Engine Data:  Retrieve a wide variety of unprocessed 
information that is stored in SE databases.  
 
DATA RANGE : 
 
 
Data Generation:  
• Data is growing at a tremendous pace that is 3.5  quintillion bytes  is how much 
data is created every day.  
• A Single person generates 1.7 MB  of data every second . 
• On average a pers on generates around  1.7 GB of data  per day .  
• Aroun d 5.35 billion internet users worldwide, each person can generate 
approximately 15.87 TB of data daily.  
• On average, Google Processes 99,000  searches each second.  

 
 
 
 
 • Facebook  Generates 4PB (Peta Bytes) of data daily , which is equivalent to 
million gigabytes . 
• On average data consum ption per user per month in 2023  in India was 
24.1GB. 
• Spotify uses 2MB + per 3 -minute  song which is 40MB every hour or 960 MB 
per day  
Type of Media  Amount per Minute  Amount per Day  
Emails sent  231.4 million  333.22 billion  
Snaps shared on 
Snapchat  2.43 million  3.5 billion  
Tweets shared on 
Twitter  347,200  499.97 million  
 
Big Data Challenges:  The major challenges associated with big data are 
as follows −  
• Capturing data  
• Storage  
• Security  
• Analysis  
• To fulfill the above challenges, organizations normally take the help 
of enterprise servers.  
BIG DATA ANALYTICS  
• Big Data analytics is the process of examining and deriving 
meaningful insights from large and complex datasets.  
 
 
 
 
 • It involves the use of various techniques, technologies, and tools to 
analyze data with the goal of uncovering patterns, trends, 
correlations, and valuable information that can lead to informed 
decision -making and strategic planning.  
• Data analytics can shape business processes, improve decision -
making, and business growth.   
• There are  mainly 4 types of analytics :  
 
➢ Descriptive  Analytics: Descriptive Analytics is focused solely on 
historical data , describing without judgment. It tells what happen in 
the past and uses some statistics functions and returns 
answers (“What happened?” ). This helps in creating reports, like a 
company’s revenue, profit, sales, and so on.  
➢ Ex: Google Analytics and Netflix  
➢ Diagnostic Analytics :  It finds out the root cause for happened thing 
in medical diagnosis . (why Did this happen.)  
➢ This is done to understand what caused a problem in the first place. 
Techniques like  data mining , and data recovery are all examples. 

 
 
 
 
 Organizations use diagnostic analytics because they provide an in -
depth insight into a particular problem  
➢ Use Case: An e-commerce company’s  report shows that their 
sales have gone down, although customers are adding products 
to their carts. This can be due to various reasons  like the form 
didn’t load correctly, the shipping fee is too high,  or there 
are not enough payment options available. This is where you 
can use diagnostic analytics to find the reason.  
➢ Predictive   Analytics  : This type of analytics looks into the 
historical and present data to make predictions of the future. States 
that some specified event will happen in future i.e. what might  
happen in future, to reduce loses for the users. (“What might 
happen in the future?”) . Predictive analytics uses  data mining , AI, 
and machine learning  to analyze current data and make predictions 
about the future. It works on predicting customer trends, market 
trends, and so on.   
➢ Example:  Netflix uses AI -powered algorithms to make 
predictions based on the user's watch history, search history, 
demographics, ratings, and preferences  
➢ Prescriptive Analytics: It deals with  Imposition of a rule/method. 
What we should do  like what kind of action should be performed.  
This type of analytics prescribes the solution to a particular problem. 
Perspective analytics works with both descriptive and predictive 
analytics. Most of the time, it relies on AI and machine learning.  
 
 
 
 
  Eg: self driving  cars which analyzes environment and moves on the 
road.(“What should we do next?”)  
 
Characteristics of Big Data – The Four V ’s: 
 
➢ Volume  
➢ Velocity  
➢ Variety  
➢ Veracity  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VOLUME  
(The Amount 
of Data)  
VELOCITY  
(The Speed 
of Data)  
Four V’S  
Of  
Big Data  
VARIETY  
(The different 
types of Data)  
VERACITY  
(The Quality 
of Data)  
 
 
 
 
  
Volume:  Volume  refers to the  unimaginable  amounts  of 
information  generated  every  second from many sources such as social 
media, cell phones, credit cards, sensors,  images, video, and many more . 
Velocity:  
• Velocity Refers to the speed  by which the data is created in  real-
time .  
• It deals with the speed at the data flows from sources like  application 
logs, business processes, networks, and social media sites, sensors, 
mobile devices , etc. 
• It contains the linking of incoming  data sets speeds, rate of 
change , and  activity bursts .  
Variety:  
• It Refers to Data  generated  in multiple varieties . 
• It refers to nature of data that is structured, semi -structured  and 
unstructured data that are being collected from different sources.   
• Variety is basically the arrival of data from new sources that are 
both inside and outside of an enterprise. It can be structured, semi -
structured and unstructured.  
• Structured  data : This data is basically an organized 
data. It is in a tabular form. Structured Data is stored in 
the relational database management system.  
• Semi - Structured  data : This data is basically a semi -
organised data. It is generally a form of data that do not 
conform to the formal structure of data. Log files are the 
 
 
 
 
 examples of this type of data , JSON, XML,  and email  
etc. 
• Unstructured  data : This data basically refers to 
unorganized data.  
•  It generally refers to data that doesn’t fit neatly into the 
traditional row and column structure of the relational 
database.  
• Texts, pictures, videos etc. are the examples of 
unstructured data which can’t be stored in the form of 
rows and columns.  
 
Veracity:  
• Veracity refers to the  Trustworthiness in terms of quality and 
accuracy.  
• Veracity means how much the data is reliable.  
• It has many ways to filter or translate the data. Veracity is the 
process of being able to handle and manage data efficiently.  
• Big Data is also essential in business development.  
 
IMPORTANCE OF BIG DATA:  
➢ Big Data importance doesn’t revolve around the amount of data a company 
has. Its importance lies in the fact that how the company utilizes the gathered 
data.  
➢ Every company uses its collected data in its own way. More effectively the 
company uses its data, more rapidly it grows.  
➢ The companies in the present market need to collect it and analyze it because 
of following Reasons:  
 
 
 
 
 1. Cost Savings  
Big Data tools like Apache Hadoop, Spark, etc. bring cost -saving benefits 
to businesses when they have to store large amounts of data. These tools 
help organizations in identifying more effective ways of doing business.  
2. Time -Saving  
Real-time in -memory analytics helps companies to collect data from 
various sources. Tools like Hadoop help them to analyze data immediately 
thus helping in making quick decisions based on the learnings.  
3. Understand the market conditions  
Big Data analysis helps businesses to get a better understanding of market 
situations.  
For example, analysis of customer purchasing behavior helps companies 
to identify the products sold most and thus produces those products 
accordingly. This helps companies to get ahead of their competitors.  
4. Social Media Listening/ Control online reputation:  
Companies can perform sentiment analysis using Big Data tools. These 
enable them to get feedback about their company, that is, who is saying 
what about the company.  
5. Big Data Analytics in Product  Development:  
Another huge advantage of big data is the ability to help companies 
innovate and  
redevelop their products  
 
 
 
 
  
Different  Use Cases / Applications:   
 

 
 
 
 
 Banking, Financial Services, and Insurance (BFSI)  
➢ BFSI is one of the most data -intensive domains in the world 
economy.  
➢  Financial institutions have huge amounts of customer data, such as 
information on customer profile data collected for KYC, deposits 
and withdrawals at ATMs, online payments, and more.  
➢ Big data technologies enable financial institutions to easily access 
data and eliminate redundancy and overlapping.  
Banking and  finance  institutions leverage big data technologies data sets 
to maximize customer understanding and gain a competitive advantage.  
 
Big Data use cases in the BFSI industry  
• Improved levels of customer insight  
• Customer engagement  
• Fraud detection and prevention  
• Market trading analysis  
• Risk management  
• New data -driven products and services  
Healthcare  
➢ Healthcare  institutions gather a large amount of data in the form of 
patient details, physician’s prescriptions, medical imaging, lab 
reports, insurance, and other administrative data. Using big data, the 
vast amount of data can be stored systematically and easily a ccessed 
when needed.  
➢ Many healthcare institutions are using electronic health records 
(EHR) to gain a deeper understanding of patient disease patterns.  
 
 
 
 
 ➢ Using big data, healthcare practitioners can access a wide range of 
data and make informed decisions related to the patient’s health, 
hospital performance, and more.  
Big Data use cases in the Healthcare industry  
• Improved patient predictions  
• Real-time alerts  
• Electronic Health Records (EHRs)  
• Better patient engagement  
• Smoother hospital administration  
Education  
➢ In the  education  sector, a lot of data is collected in the form of names 
of students enrolled in a program/course, enrollment year, course 
details, student ID, marks obtained in each subject, and more.  
➢ Using big data, educators can store this information efficiently and 
identify patterns and trends to spot opportunities for positive change 
in the performance of both the students and the educational 
institutions.  
➢ Big data analytics help educators reveal trends in students’ behavior 
and their preferences to create customized programs. It also gives a 
base to evaluate the state of the entire education system.  
Big Data use cases in the Education industry  
• Create customized programs  
• Improve student’s results  
• Reduce dropouts  
• Identify leaner’s strengths  
• Data -driven decision making  
 
 
 
 
 Manufacturing  
➢ In manufacturing, data is gathered from machines, devices, and 
operators at every stage of production. Big data help manufacturers 
store this data efficiently.  
➢ The use of big data also allows firms to identify new ways to save 
costs and improve product quality.  
➢ Using big data analytics, companies can find patterns to solve 
existing problems and improve the overall process. Monitoring 
equipment performance and predicting maintenance needs to 
minimize downtime.  
Big Data use cases in the Manufacturing industry  
• Customize product design  
• Predictive quality  
• Anomaly detection  
• Better management of supply chain  
• Production forecasting  
• Yield improvement  
• Risk evaluation  
Social Media:   
➢ Analyzing user interactions for sentiment analysis, brand 
perception, and trend forecasting.  
IT :  
➢ One of the largest users of Big Data, IT companies around the world 
are using Big Data to optimize their functioning, enhance employee 
productivity, and minimize risks in business operations. By 
combining Big Data technologies with ML and AI, the IT sector  is 
 
 
 
 
 continually powering innovation to find solutions even for the most 
complex of problems.  
Ecommerce – 
➢ Predicting customer trends and optimizing prices are a few of the 
ways e -commerce uses Big Data analytics  
Marketing  – Big Data analytics helps to drive high ROI marketing 
campaigns, which result in improved sales . 
Media and entertainment  – Used to understand the demand of shows, 
movies, songs, and more to deliver a personalized recommendation list to 
its users  
 
SOURCES OF BIG DATA  
 

 
 
 
 
 Source  of Big Data:  
• Social  Media:  Today’s world a good percent of the total world 
population is engaged with social media like Facebook, 
WhatsApp, Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, etc. Each activity on 
such media like uploading a photo, or video, sending a message, 
making comment, putting like, etc create data.  
• A sensor  placed  in various  places:  Sensor placed in various 
places of the city that gathers data on temperature, humidity, etc. 
A camera placed beside the road gather information about traffic 
condition and creates data. Security cameras placed in sensitive 
areas like airports, railway stat ions, and shopping malls create a 
lot of data.  
• Customer  Satisfaction  Feedback:  Customer feedback on the 
product or service of the various company on their website 
creates data. For Example, retail commercial sites like Amazon, 
Walmart, Flipkart, and Myntra gather customer feedback on the 
quality of their product and delivery time. Te lecom companies, 
and other service provider organizations seek customer 
experience with their service. These create a lot of data.  
• E-commerce:  In e -commerce transactions, business 
transactions, banking, and the stock market, lots of records 
stored are considered one of the sources of big data. Payments 
through credit cards, debit cards, or other electronic ways, all are 
kept recorded as data.  
• Global  Positioning  System  (GPS):  GPS in the vehicle helps 
in monitoring the movement of the vehicle to shorten the path to 
a destination to cut fuel, and time consumption. This system 
creates huge data on vehicle position and movement.  
• Transactional  Data:  Transactional data, as the name implies, 
is information obtained through online and offline transactions 
at various points of sale. The data contains important 
information about transactions, such as the date and time of the 
transaction, the location where  it took place, the items bought, 
 
 
 
 
 their prices, the methods of payment, the discounts or coupons 
that were applied, and other pertinent quantitative data. These 
are some of the sources of transactional data: orders for 
payment, Invoices, E -receipts and recordkeeping etc.  
• Machine  Data:  Automatically generated machine data is 
produced in reaction to an event or according to a set timetable. 
This indicates that all of the data was compiled from a variety of 
sources, including satellites, desktop computers, mobile phones, 
industrial machine s, smart sensors, SIEM logs, medical and 
wearable devices, road cameras, IoT devices, and more. These 
sensors are used to capture this kind of information: In a broader 
sense, machine data includes data that is generated by servers, 
user applications, webs ites, cloud programmes, and other 
sources.  
 
  
Big Data Formats /Types : 
 

 
 
 
 
 STRUCTURED DATA : The data that can be stored, accessed processed  &  
retrieved in the form of fixed format is termed as a ‘structured’ data . 
•  Structured data can be crudely defined as the data that resides in a fixed field 
within a record.  
• It is represented in a Tabular Format.  
• Eg: An ‘ Employee’  table in a database is an example of 
Structured Data, etc.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
  
SEMI -STRUCTURED DATA:  
• Semi -structured data refers to data that is not captured or formatted in 
conventional ways.  
• Semi -structured data does not follow the format of a tabular data model or 
relational databases because it does not have a fixed schema.  
• Since semi -structured data doesn’t need a structured query language, it is 
commonly called  NoSQL  data. 
• However, the data is not completely raw or unstructured, and does contain 
some structural elements such as tags and organizational metadata that 
make it easier to analyze.  
• The advantages of semi -structured data is that it is more flexible and 
simpler to scale compared to  structured data . 
Eg: HTML code, Email’s  
       graphs and tables,  
       XML ,JSON documents   
 

 
 
 
 
  
 
UN-STRUCTURED DATA:  
➢ Unstructured data is the kind of data that doesn’t adhere to any definite 
schema or set of rules.   
➢ Unstructured data refers to the data that lacks any specific form or structure 
whatsoever. This makes it very difficult and time -consuming to process and 
analyze unstructured data.   
➢ A typical example of unstructured data is a heterogeneous data source 
containing a combination of simple text files, images, videos etc.   
➢ Additionally, Unstructured data is also known as “dark data” because it 
cannot be analyzed without the proper software tools  
➢ Eg:  Audio , simple text files, images , PDF’s , videos ,web pages etc.   

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Introduction to Hadoop and its use in Solving big Data Problems  
       Traditional Approach of Storing Data : 
              
Limitation  
• This approach works fine with those applications that process less 
voluminous data that can be accommodated by standard database 
servers, or up to the limit of the processor that is processing the data.  
• But when it comes to dealing with huge amounts of scalable data, it 
is a hectic task to process such data through a single database.  
To Overcome the Limitation , HADOOP  Comes in as a Solution For 
Storing & Processing Large Voluminous Amounts of Data . 
INTRODUCTION TO HADOOP:     
➢ Hadoop Stands f or High Availability Distributed Object  
Oriented  Platform . Hadoop is an open -source framework 
Designed  for distributed storage and processing large data sets 
across Clusters of Commodity Hardware.  Or other definition is :  It 
is used to store process and analyze data which are very huge in 
volume.  
➢ Its framework is based on Java programming   

 
 
 
 
 ➢ It was developed by Doug Cutting and Mike Cafarella and is now , 
administered by the Apache Software Foundation.   
➢ The primary goal of Hadoop is to enable the processing of vast 
amounts of data in a cost -effective and efficient manner  
➢ It is designed to handle big data and is based on the MapReduce 
programming model, which allows for the parallel processing of 
large datasets.  
➢  Unlike traditional, structured platforms, Hadoop is able to store 
any kind of data in its native format and to perform a wide variety 
of analyses and transformations on that data.   
➢ Hadoop solves the problem of Big data by storing the data in 
distributed form in different machines. There are plenty of data but 
that data have to be store in a cost effective way and process it 
efficiently.  
➢ Hadoop stores terabytes, and even petabytes, of data inexpensively.  
➢ It is being used by Facebook, Yahoo, Google, Twitter, LinkedIn 
and many more.  
➢  It is robust and reliable and handles hardware and system failures 
automatically, without losing data or interrupting data analyses.  
 
How Hadoop Solves the Big Data Problem : 
➢ Hadoop is built to run on a cluster of machines : 
 
 
 
 
  
➢ Hadoop clusters scale horizontally : More storage and compute 
power can be achieved by adding more nodes to a Hadoop cluster. 
This eliminates the need to buy more and more powerful and 
expensive hardware.  
➢ Hadoop can handle unstructured/semi -structured data : Hadoop 
doesn't enforce a schema on the data it stores. It can handle arbitrary 
text and binary data. So Hadoop can digest any  unstructured 
data easily.  
➢ Hadoop clusters provides storage and computing : Hadoop 
clusters, however, provide storage and distributed computing all in 
one. 
➢ Hadoop provides storage for big data at reasonable cost : Storing 
big data using traditional storage can be expensive. Hadoop is built 
around commodity hardware, so it can provide fairly large storage 
for a reasonable cost. Hadoop has been used in the field at petabyte 
scale.  
➢ With Hadoop, you can store data longer : To manage the volume 
of data stored, companies periodically purge older data. For 
example, only logs for the last three months could be stored, while 
older logs were deleted. With Hadoop it is possible to store the 
historical data longer. This allows new a nalytics to be done on older 
historical data.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 BRIEF HISTORY OF HADOOP:  
 

 
 
 
 
 1. In 2002,  Doug Cutting  and Mike Cafarella started to work on a 
project,  Apache Nutch.  Apache Nutch  is a highly extensible and 
scalable open -source  web crawler software project.   
While working on Apache Nutch , they were dealing with big data. 
To store that data  they have to spend a lot of costs which becomes 
the consequence of that project. This problem becomes one of the 
important reason for the emergence of Hadoop.  
2. In 2003,  Google introduced a file system known as GFS  (Google 
file system ). It is a proprietary distributed file system developed to 
provide efficient access to data.  
3. In 2004 , Google released a white paper on Map Reduce . This 
technique simplifies the data processing on large clusters.  
4. In 2005,  Doug Cutting and Mike Cafarella introduced a new file 
system known as NDFS (Nutch Distributed File System).  This file 
system also includes Map reduce.  
5. In 2006 , Doug Cutting quit Google and joined Yahoo. On the basis 
of the Nutch project, Dough Cutting introduces a new project 
Hadoop with a file system known as HDFS (Hadoop Distributed 
File System). Hadoop first version 0.1.0 released in this year.  
6. Doug Cutting gave named his project Hadoop  after his son's toy 
elephant . 
7. In 2007,  Dough cutting split the  Distributed computing parts from 
Nutch ad Created Hadoop. Yahoo runs two clusters of 1000 
machines.  
8. In 2008,  Yahoo Successfully Tested Hadoop on 1000 Node Cluster . 
Yahoo Releasd Hadoop as open source project to Apache Software 
Foundation.   
9. In 2009,  Hadoop was successfully tested to sort Peta bytes of data 
in less than17hrs . 
10. In 2011 , Hadoop 1.0 was released.  
11. In 2012,  Hadoop 2.0 was released.  
12. In 2017,  Hadoop 3.0 was released.  
 
 
 
 
 13. In 2020,  Hadoop 3.1.3  was released  
14. In 2022, Hadoop 3.2.4 was released  
 
 
1. Cost  
Hadoop is open -source  and uses cost -effective commodity hardware  
which provides a cost -efficient model, unlike traditional Relational 
databases that require expensive hardware and high -end processors to deal 
with Big Data. The problem with traditional Relational databases is that 
storing the Massive volume of data is n ot cost -effective, so the company’s 
started to remove the Raw data. which may not result in the correct 
scenario of their business.  
2. Scalability  

 
 
 
 
 Hadoop is a highly scalable model. A large amount of data is divided into 
multiple inexpensive machines in a cluster which is processed parallelly. 
the number of these machines or nodes can be increased or decreased as 
per the enterprise’s requirements. In  traditional RDBMS (Relational 
DataBase Management System) the systems can not be scaled to approach 
large amounts of data.  
3. Flexibility  
Hadoop is designed in such a way that it can deal with any kind of dataset 
like structured(MySql Data), Semi -Structured(XML, JSON), Un -
structured (Images and Videos) very efficiently. This means it can easily 
process any kind of data independent of its str ucture which makes it highly 
flexible. which is very much useful for enterprises as they can process 
large datasets easily, so the businesses can use Hadoop to analyze valuable 
insights of data from sources like social media, email, etc. with this 
flexibil ity Hadoop can be used with log processing, Data Warehousing, 
Fraud detection, etc.  
4. Speed  
Hadoop uses a distributed file system to manage its storage i.e. 
HDFS(Hadoop Distributed File System). In DFS(Distributed File 
System) a large size file is broken into small size file blocks then 
distributed among the Nodes available in a Hadoop cluster, a s this massive 
number of file blocks are processed parallelly which makes Hadoop 
faster, because of which it provides a High -level performance as 
compared to the traditional DataBase Management Systems.  
5. Fault Tolerance  
Hadoop uses commodity hardware(inexpensive systems) which can be 
crashed at any moment. In Hadoop data is replicated on various 
 
 
 
 
 DataNodes in a Hadoop cluster which ensures the availability of data if 
somehow any of your systems got crashed.  
6. High Throughput  
Hadoop works on Distributed file System where various jobs are assigned 
to various Data node in a cluster, the bar of this data is processed parallelly 
in the Hadoop cluster which produces high throughput. Throughput is 
nothing but the task or job done per  unit time.  
7. Minimum Network Traffic  
In Hadoop, each task is divided into various small sub -task which is then 
assigned to each data node available in the Hadoop cluster. Each data node 
process a small amount of data which leads to low traffic in a Hadoop 
cluster . 
Hadoop Disadvantages:  
 

 
 
 
 
 1. Problem with Small files  
Hadoop can efficiently perform over a small number of files of large size. 
Hadoop stores the file in the form of file blocks which are from 128MB 
in size(by default) to 256MB. Hadoop fails when it needs to access the 
small size file in a large amount. This  so many small files surcharge the 
Namenode and make it difficult to work.  
2. Vulnerability  
Hadoop is a framework that is written in java, and java is one of the most 
commonly used programming languages which makes it more insecure as 
it can be easily exploited by any of the cyber -criminal.  
3. Low Performance In Small Data Surrounding  
Hadoop is mainly designed for dealing with large datasets, so it can be 
efficiently utilized for the organizations that are generating a massive 
volume of data. It’s efficiency decreases while performing in small data 
surroundings.  
4. Lack of Security  
Data is everything for an organization, by default the security feature in 
Hadoop is made un -available. So the Data driver needs to be careful with 
this security face and should take appropriate action on it. Hadoop uses 
Kerberos  for security feature which is not easy to manage. Storage and 
network encryption are missing in Kerberos which makes us more 
concerned about it.  
5. High Up Processing  
Read/Write operation in Hadoop is immoderate since we are dealing with 
large size data that is in TB or PB. In Hadoop, the data read or write done 
 
 
 
 
 from the disk which makes it difficult to perform in -memory calculation 
and lead to processing overhead or High up processing.  
6. Supports Only Batch Processing  
The batch process is nothing but the processes that are running in the 
background and does not have any kind of interaction with the user. The 
engines used for these processes inside the Hadoop core is not that much 
efficient. Producing the output with low  latency is not possible with it.  
 
 
Comparison of Hadoop with RDBMS  
 RDBMS   HADOOP   
1. Traditional row -column based 
databases, basically used for data 
storage, manipulation and retrieval.  An open -source software 
used for storing data and 
running applications or 
processes concurrently.  
2. In this structured data is mostly 
processed.  In this both structured and 
unstructured data is 
processed.  
3. It is best suited for OLTP 
environment.( Online Transaction 
Processing)   It is best suited for BIG data.  
 
 
 
 
 4. It is less scalable than Hadoop.  It is highly scalable.  
5. Data normalization is required in 
RDBMS.  Data normalization is not 
required in Hadoop.  
6. It stores transformed and aggregated 
data.  It stores huge volume of data.  
7  The data schema of RDBMS is static 
type.  The data schema of Hadoop is 
dynamic type.  
8. High data integrity available.  Low data integrity available 
than RDBMS.  
9. Cost is applicable for licensed 
software.  Free of cost, as it is an open 
source software.  
 
 
APACHE HADOOP ECOSYSTEM : 
Apache Hadoop ecosystem  is a collection of open -source projects and 
tools that work together to extend and enhance the capabilities of the 
Hadoop platform. These projects provide various functionalities for data 
storage, processing, analysis, and management. Here are some key 
components of the Apache Hadoop ecosystem:  
 
 
 
 
 
  
HDFS  -> Hadoop Distributed File System  
➢ Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), HDFS is the primary or 
major component of Hadoop ecosystem and is responsible for 
storing large data sets of structured or unstructured data across 
various nodes and thereby maintaining the metadata in the form of 
log files.  
➢ It is a distributed file system able to store large files running over 
the cluster of commodity hardware.  
➢ HDFS consists of two core components i.e.   
➢ Name node  
➢ Data Node  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 HBase  : NoSQL Database  
➢ HBase is a column -oriented non-relational database management 
system that runs on top of  Hadoop  Distributed  File System  (HDFS) . 
This means that data is stored in individual columns, and indexed by 
a unique row key . 
➢ Apache HBase is an open -source, NoSQL , distributed big data store. 
It enables random, strictly consistent, real -time access to petabytes 
of data.  
➢ HBase is very effective for handling large, sparse datasets.  
➢ It’s a NoSQL database which supports all kinds of data and thus 
capable of handling  anything of Hadoop Database  
➢ HBase integrates seamlessly with Apache Hadoop and the Hadoop 
ecosystem and runs on top of the Hadoop Distributed File System 
(HDFS   
➢ It provides capabilities of Google’s BigTable, thus able to work on 
Big Data sets effectively.  
➢ At times where we need to search or retrieve the occurrences of 
something small in a huge database, the request must be processed 
within a short quick span of time. At such times, HBase comes 
handy as it gives us a tolerant way of storing limited data . 
➢ A distributed, scalable NoSQL database that provides random 
access to large amounts of structured data . 
➢ It is well suited for real -time data processing or random read/write 
access to large volumes of data.  
MAPEDUCE -> Data processing using programming  
➢ A programming model and processing framework for distributed 
computation, widely used for batch processing of large datasets.  
 
 
 
 
 ➢ Hadoop runs applications using the MapReduce algorithm, where 
the data is processed in parallel with others.  
➢ In short, Hadoop is used to develop applications that could perform 
complete statistical analysis on huge amounts of data.  
➢ This is another data processing layer of Hadoop.  
➢ It has the capability to process large structured and unstructured data 
as well as to manage very large data files in parallel by dividing the 
job into a set of independent tasks (sub -job).  
➢ This is a framework which helps Java programs to do the parallel 
computation on data using key value pair. The Map task takes input 
data and converts it into a data set which can be computed in Key 
value pair. The output of Map task is consumed by reduce t ask and 
then the out of reducer gives the desired result.  
➢ MapReduce makes the use of two functions i.e. Map() and 
Reduce() whose task is:   
➢ Map()  performs sorting and filtering of data and thereby organizing 
them in the form of group. Map generates a key -value pair based 
result which is later on processed by the Reduce() method.  
➢ Reduce(), as the name suggests does the summarization by 
aggregating the mapped data. In simple, Reduce() takes the output 
generated by Map() as input and combines those tuples into smaller 
set of tuples.  
➢  

 
 
 
 
 YARN  -> Yet Another Resource Negotiator ( allocates Resources)  
➢ YARN stands for Yet Another Resource Negotiator. It is one of the 
core components in open source Apache Hadoop suitable for 
resource management.  
➢ It is responsible for managing workloads, monitoring, and security 
controls implementation.  
➢ YARN is the one who helps to manage the resources across the 
clusters. In short, it performs job scheduling and resource allocation 
for the Hadoop System.   
➢ It also allocates system resources to the various applications running 
in a Hadoop cluster while assigning which tasks should be executed 
by each cluster nodes. YARN has t hree main components:  
• Resource Manager  
• Node Manager  
• Application Manager  
Resource manager has the privilege of allocating resources for the 
applications in a system .  
 Node managers work on the allocation of resources such as CPU, 
memory, bandwidth per machine and later on acknowledges the 
resource manager.  
Application manager works as an interface between the resource 
manager and node manager and performs negotiations as per the 
requirement of the two.  
HIVE-> Data  Processing Services using Query (SQL)  
➢ A data warehousing and SQL -like query language that provides a 
high-level abstraction over Hadoop and allows users to query and 
analyze data using SQL queries.  
➢ It provides SQL type language for querying called HiveQL or 
HQL(Hive Query Language).  HIVE + SQL = HQL  
 
 
 
 
 ➢ Hive is an ETL and Data warehousing tool used to query or 
analyze large datasets stored within the Hadoop ecosystem.  
➢ Hive has three main functions: data summarization, query , and 
analysis of unstructured and semi -structured data in Hadoop.  
➢ It features a SQL -like interface, HQL language that works similar 
to SQL and automatically translates queries into MapReduce jobs.  
➢ Hive uses a language called HiveQL( HQL), which is similar to 
SQL . 
➢ Hive QL works as a translator which translates the SQL queries 
into MapReduce Jobs, which will be executed on Hadoop.  
➢ With the help of SQL methodology and interface, HIVE performs 
reading and writing of large data sets. However, its query language 
is called as HQL (Hive Query Language).  
➢ It is highly scalable as it allows real -time processing and batch 
processing both. Also, all the SQL datatypes are supported by Hive 
thus, making the query processing easier.  
➢ Similar to the Query Processing frameworks, HIVE too comes 
with two components:  JDBC Drivers  and HIVE Command Line.  
➢ JDBC, along with ODBC drivers work on establishing the data 
storage permissions and connection whereas HIVE Command line 
helps in the processing of queries.  
 
 
PIG:    
➢ Apache Pig is a high -level language platform for analyzing and 
querying large data sets that are stored in HDFS.  
➢ Pig works as an alternative language to Java programming for 
MapReduce and generates MapReduce functions automatically.  
➢ Pig was basically developed by Yahoo which works on a pig Latin 
language, which is Query based language similar to SQL.   
➢ Pig can translate the Pig Latin scripts into MapReduce which can 
run on YARN and process data in HDFS cluster.  
 
 
 
 
 ➢ Pig is best suitable for solving complex use cases that require 
multiple data operations.  
➢ It is more like a processing language than a query language (ex:Java, 
SQL). Pig is considered as a highly customized one because the 
users have a choice to write their functions by using their preferred 
scripting language.  
➢ A platform for analyzing large datasets using a high -level scripting   
language called Pig Latin, which simplifies data processing tasks.  
➢ Pig does the work of executing commands and in the background, 
all the activities of MapReduce are taken care of. After the 
processing, pig stores the result in HDFS.  
➢ It is a platform for structuring the data flow, processing and 
analyzing huge data sets.  
➢ Pig Latin language is specially designed for this framework which 
runs on Pig Runtime. Just the way Java runs on the  JVM . 
➢ Pig helps to achieve ease of programming and optimization and 
hence is a major segment of the Hadoop Ecosystem.  
 
MAHOUT :   MLlib  -> Machine Learning  
➢ A machine learning library for building scalable and effective 
machine learning algorithms on top of Hadoop.  
➢ Mahout, allows Machine Learnability to a system or application. 
Machine Learning , as the name suggests helps the system to 
develop itself based on some patterns, user/environmental 
interaction or on the basis of algorithms.  
➢ It provides various libraries or functionalities such as collaborative 
filtering, clustering, and classification which are nothing but 
concepts of Machine learning. It allows invoking algorithms as per 
our need with the help of its own libraries.  
➢ It implements popular machine learning techniques such as:  
• Filtering  
 
 
 
 
 • Classification  
• Clustering  
 
SQOOP  -> A tool for transferring data between Hadoop and 
relational databases, facilitating the import and export of data.  
➢ Sqoop works as a front -end loader of Big data. Sqoop is a front -end 
interface that enables in moving bulk data from Hadoop to relational 
databases and Vice versa.  
➢ Sqoop fulfills the growing need to transfer data from the mainframe 
to HDFS.  
 
 
 
Avro : 
➢ Apache Avro is a part of the Hadoop ecosystem, and it works as a 
data serialization system.  

 
 
 
 
 ➢ It is an open -source project which helps Hadoop in data serialization 
and data exchange.  
➢ Avro enables big data in exchanging programs written in different 
languages. It serializes data into files or messages.  
➢ Avro Schema:  Schema helps Avro in the serialization and 
deserialization process without code generation. Avro needs a 
schema for data to read and write.  Whenever we store data in a file 
it’s schema also stored along with it, with this the files may be 
processed later  by any program.  
Avro features  
● Avro makes Fast, compact, dynamic data formats.  
● It has a Container file to store continuous data format.  
● It helps in creating efficient data structures.  
 
Oozie (job Scheduling) :  
Apache Oozie is an open -source workflow scheduler that helps manage 
Hadoop jobs in Big Data analytics  
➢ Apache Ooze is a tool in which all sort of programs can be pipelined 
in a required manner to work in Hadoop's distributed environment.  
➢ Oozie works as a  scheduler system to run and manage Hadoop jobs.  
➢ Oozie allows combining multiple complex jobs to be run in a 
sequential order to achieve the desired output.  
➢ It is strongly integrated with Hadoop stack supporting various jobs 
like Pig, Hive, Sqoop, and system -specific jobs like Java, and Shell.  
➢ Oozie is an open -source Java web application.  
 
Chukwa : 
➢ Chukwa is a data collection system for monitoring and analyzing 
large distributed systems.  
 
 
 
 
 ➢ It’s designed to collect data from various sources within a Hadoop 
cluster, such as log files and metrics, and store it in a central 
repository for further analysis.  
➢ Chukwa is a part of the Hadoop ecosystem and can help manage and 
understand your Hadoop cluster’s performance  
 
Apache Flume: Data Ingesting Services  
➢ Flume collects, aggregates, and moves large sets of data from its 
origin and sends it back to HDFS.  
➢ It works as a fault -tolerant mechanism.  
➢ It helps in transmitting data from a source into a Hadoop 
environment.  
➢ Flume enables its users in getting data from multiple servers 
immediately into  Hadoop.  
➢ A distributed, reliable, and available system for efficiently 
collecting, aggregating, and moving large amounts of log and event 
data from various sources like network traffic, social media,email 
etc to HDFS.  
 
Apache Zookeeper -> Managing Cluster  
➢ A distributed coordination service that helps manage and 
synchronize distributed applications and services  
➢ Apache Zookeeper is an open -source project designed to coordinate 
multiple services in the Hadoop ecosystem.  
➢ Organizing and maintaining a service in a distributed environment 
is a complicated task.  
➢ Zookeeper solves this problem with its simple APIs and 
Architecture. Zookeeper allows developers to focus on core 
 
 
 
 
 applications instead of concentrating on a distributed environment 
of the application.  
➢ Features of Zookeeper  
➢ Zookeeper acts fast enough with workloads where reads to data are 
more common than writes.  
➢ Zookeeper acts as a disciplined one because it maintains a record of 
all transactions.  
 
 
COMPONENTS OF HADOOP : 
Hadoop  is a framework that uses distributed storage and parallel 
processing to store and manage big data. It is the software most used by 
data analysts to handle big data. Below These are the Core Components 
of Hadoop:  
1. Hadoop HDFS  - Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)  is the 
storage unit.  
2. Hadoop MapReduce  - Hadoop MapReduce  is the processing 
unit.  
3. Hadoop YARN  - Yet Another Resource Negotiator (YARN)  is a 
resource management unit.  
4. Hadoop Common – Java Libraries & Utilities  
 
 
 
 
  
   HDFS   : 
➢ Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS): HDFS is a distributed file 
system designed to store large datasets across multiple machines.  
➢ It divides files into blocks and replicates them across the cluster to 
ensure fault tolerance and data availability.  
➢ HDFS is the primary or major component of Hadoop ecosystem and 
is responsible for storing large data sets of structured or unstructured 
data across various nodes and thereby maintaining the metadata in 
the form of log files.  
➢ HDFS consists of two core components i.e.  
                    Name node  
                    Data Node  
➢ Name Node  is the prime node which contains metadata (data about 
data) requiring comparatively fewer resources than the data nodes  
that stores the actual data . These data nodes are commodity 
hardware in the distributed environment. Undoubtedly, making 
Hadoop cost effective.  

 
 
 
 
 ➢ HDFS maintains all the coordination between the clusters and 
hardware, thus working at the heart of the system.  
➢ HDFS supports high throughput data access, making it suitable for 
applications that require large sequential reads.  
 
H Base  
Hbase is considered as a Hadoop database, because it is scalable, 
distributed, and because NoSQL database that runs on top of Hadoop. 
Apache HBase  is designed to store the structured data on table format 
which has millions of columns and billions of rows. HBase gives access 
to get the real -time data to read or write on HDFS.   
● HBase is an open source, NoSQL database.  
● It is featured after Google’s big table, which is considered as a 
distributed storage system designed to handle big data sets.  
● It has a unique feature to support all types of data. With this feature, 
it plays a crucial role in handling various types of data in Hadoop.  
 
MAP REDUCE:  
➢ MapReduce Programming Model: MapReduce is a programming 
paradigm or framework that is used for processing  the large datasets 
in parallel across a distributed cluster.  
➢ It comprises two main phases: the " Map" phase  & "Reduce" 
phase ,  
➢ MapPhase:  performs sorting and filtering of data and thereby 
organizing them in the form of group. Map generates a key -value 
pair based result which is later on processed by the Reduce() 
method.  
➢ Reduce  Phase:  as the name suggests does the summarization by 
aggregating the mapped data. In simple, Reduce() takes the output 
generated by Map() as input and combines those tuples into smaller 
set of tuples.  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
YARN  (Yet Another Resource Negotiator):   
➢ YARN is a resource management platform that manages and 
allocates resources across the cluster, enabling different processing 
frameworks to run concurrently on the same cluster.   
➢ Hadoop YARN acts like an OS to Hadoop. It is a file system that is 
built on top of HDFS.  
➢ It is responsible for managing cluster resources to make sure you 
don't overload one machine.  
➢ It performs job scheduling to make sure that the jobs are scheduled 
in the right place . 
➢ It Consists of three major components i.e.   
                        Resource Manager  
                        Nodes Manager  
                       Application Manager  
➢ Resource manager  has the privilege of allocating resources for the 
applications in a system . 
➢  Node managers  work on the allocation of resources such as CPU, memory, 
bandwidth per machine and later on acknowledges the resource manager.  
➢ Application manager  works as an interface between the resource manager 
and node manager and performs negotiations as per the requirement of the 
two. 

 
 
 
 
  
Example:  
➢ Suppose a client machine wants to do a query or fetch some code 
for data analysis . This job request goes to the resource manager 
(Hadoop Yarn), which is responsible for resource allocation and 
management.  
➢ In the node section, each of the nodes has its node managers.  
➢ These node managers manage the nodes and monitor the resource 
usage in the node.  
➢ The containers contain a collection of physical resources, which 
could be RAM, CPU, or hard drives.  
➢ Whenever a job request comes in, the app master requests the 
container from the node manager. Once the node manager gets the 
resource, it goes back to the Resource Manager.  
 
 
 Hadoop Distributed File System(HDFS) -(Working)  
 
➢ HDFS( Hadoop Distributed File System) is the primary or major 
component of Hadoop ecosystem and is responsible  for storing 
large datasets across multiple machines.     

 
 
 
 
 ➢ It divides files into blocks and replicates them across the cluster to 
ensure fault tolerance and data availability.  
➢ HDFS supports high throughput data access, making it suitable for 
applications that require large sequential reads.  
➢ HDFS consists of two core components i.e.   
1. Name node(Master node)  
2. Data Node(Slave node)  
 
Name Node  - Name Node is the master Node.  
➢ There is only one active Name Node.  
➢ It manages the Data Nodes and stores all the metadata.  
➢ These data nodes are commodity hardware in the distributed 
environment. Undoubtedly, making Hadoop cost effective.  
➢ HDFS maintains all the coordination between the clusters and 
hardware, thus working at the heart of the system.  
 
Data Node    - Data Node is the slave  daemon.  
➢ There can be multiple DataNodes.  
➢ It stores the actual data  
➢ The data nodes read, write, process, and replicate the data.  
➢ They also send signals, known as heartbeats, to the name node. 
These heartbeats show the status of the data node.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
➢ HDFS splits  the data into multiple blocks, defaulting to a maximum of 128 
MB. The default block size can be changed depending on the processing speed 
and the data distribution. Let’s  look at the example below:  
                                          
➢ As seen from the above image, we have 300 MB of data. This is broken down 
into 128 MB, 128 MB, and 44 MB. The final block handles the remaining 
needed storage space, so it doesn’t have to be sized at 128 MB. This is how 
data gets stored in a distributed manner in HDFS.  
➢ Example 2:  

 
 
 
 
  
 
Architecture and Design of HDFS in detail  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Example of Data Nodes cont aining Data blocks:  
 
 
Splitting of Data Nodes :  
 
The HDFS architecture consists of the following components:  

 
 
 
 
 ➢ Name Node  
➢ Data Node  
➢ Secondary Name Node  
➢ Checkpoint Node  
➢ Rack Awareness  
➢ Replication  
 
➢ The NameNode  is responsible for the following tasks:  
• The NameNode  is the master server in HDFS & Manages the  
file system namespace  
• It executes the file system namespace operations like opening, 
re-naming, and closing files and directories.  
• NameNode manages and maintains the DataNodes.  
• It determines the mapping of blocks of a file to DataNodes.  
• NameNode records each change made to the file system 
namespace.  
• It Stores metadata about files and directories  
• Tracking the location of data blocks  
• Handling client requests for files  
• It executes the file system namespace operations like opening, 
renaming, and closing files and directories.  
• NameNode manages and maintains the DataNodes.  
• It determines the mapping of blocks of a file to DataNodes.  
 
 
 
 
 • NameNode records each change made to the file system 
namespace.  
• Rebalancing data blocks if a DataNode fails  
• Namenode instructs the DataNodes with the operation like 
delete, create, Replicate, etc.  
There are two kinds of files in NameNode: FsImage files and EditLogs files:  
• FsImage:  It contains all the details about a filesystem, including all the 
directories and files, in a hierarchical format. It is also called a file 
image because it resembles a photograph.  
• EditLogs:  The EditLogs file keeps track of what modifications have 
been made to the files of the filesystem.  
 
DataNodes  : Data nodes are known as  Slave  nodes  . 
➢ DataNodes are mainly utilized for storing the data in a Hadoop cluster, 
the number of DataNodes can be from 1 to 500 or even more than that. 
The more number of DataNode, the Hadoop cluster will be able to store 
more data. So it is advised that the DataNode  should have High storing 
capacity to store a large number of file blocks.  
➢ The DataNodes   are responsible for the following tasks:  
• The DataNodes are the slave servers in HDFS.  
• It Stores the Actual  data blocks  
• Serving read and write requests for files  
• DataNode is responsible for serving the client read/write 
requests.  
• Based on the instruction from the NameNode, DataNodes 
performs block creation, replication, and deletion.  
 
 
 
 
 • DataNodes send a heartbeat to NameNode to report the 
health of HDFS.  
• DataNodes also sends block reports to NameNode to report 
the list of blocks it contains.  
• DataNodes are replicated to ensure data consistency and 
fault tolerance. If a Node fails, the system automatically 
recovers the data from a backup and replicates it across the 
remaining healthy Nodes.  
• Rebalancing data blocks if a DataNode fails  
 
➢ The secondary NameNode  is responsible for the following tasks:  
• The secondary NameNode is a hot standby for the NameNode  
• Periodically synchronizing its metadata with the NameNode  
• Serving read and write requests for files if the NameNode fails  
• Taking over as the NameNode if the Primary NameNode fails  
• Secondary NameNode works as a helper node to primary 
NameNode but doesn’t replace primary NameNode.  
• When the NameNode starts, the NameNode merges the 
Fsimage and edit logs file to restore the current file system 
namespace. Since the NameNode runs continuously for a long 
time without any restart, the size of edit logs becomes too 
large. This will result i n a long restart time for NameNode.  
• Secondary NameNode solves this issue.  
• Secondary NameNode downloads the Fsimage file and edit 
logs file from NameNode.  
• It periodically applies edit logs to Fsimage and refreshes the 
edit logs. The updated Fsimage is then sent to the NameNode 
 
 
 
 
 so that NameNode doesn’t have to re -apply the edit log records 
during its restart. This keeps the edit log size small and reduces 
the NameNode restart time.  
 
➢ The checkpoint node  is responsible for the following tasks:   
The Checkpoint node is a node that periodically creates checkpoints of 
the namespace. Checkpoint Node in Hadoop first downloads Fsimage and 
edits from the Active Namenode. Then it merges them (Fsimage and edits) 
locally, and at last, it uploads the new image back to the active 
NameNode.  
• Storing a copy of the NameNode's metadata  
• The checkpoint node is not a mandatory component of 
HDFS, but it is recommended for production deployments  
• Restoring the NameNode's metadata if the NameNode fails  
 
Replication  In HDFS  : 
➢ Replication ensures the availability of the data. Replication is 
making a copy of something and the number of times you make a 
copy of that particular thing can be expressed as it’s Replication 
Factor.  
➢ In Hadoop, HDFS stores replicas of a block on multiple 
DataNodes based on the replication factor.  
➢ If the replication factor is 3, then three copies of a block get stored 
on different DataNodes. So if one DataNode containing the data 
block fails, then the block is accessible from the other DataNode 
containing a replica of the block.  
 
 
 
 
 ➢ If we are storing a file of 128 Mb and the replication factor is 3, 
then (3*128=384) 384 Mb of disk space is occupied for a file as 
three copies of a block get stored.  
➢ Replication of the data is performed three times by default. If a 
commodity machine fails, you can replace it with a new machine 
that has the same data.  
 
➢ Consider that 30TB of data is loaded into the name node. The name node 
distributes it across the data nodes, and this data is replicated among the data 
notes. You can see in the image above that the blue, grey, and red data are 
replicated among the three d ata nodes.  
Rack Awareness:   
➢ In a large Hadoop cluster, there are multiple racks.  
➢ Rack is the collection of around 40 -50 machines (DataNodes) 
connected using the same network switch. If the network goes down, 
the whole rack will be unavailable.  
➢ Rack Awareness is the concept of choosing the closest node based 
on the rack information.  

 
 
 
 
 ➢ To ensure that all the replicas of a block are not stored on the same 
rack or a single rack, NameNode follows a rack awareness algorithm 
to store replicas and provide latency and fault tolerance . Suppose if 
the replication factor is 3, then according to the rack awareness 
algorithm:  
➢ The first replica will get stored on the local rack.  
➢ The second replica will get stored on the other DataNode in the same 
rack.  
➢ The third replica will get stored on a different rack.  
➢ Each rack consists of DataNodes . Communication between the 
DataNodes on the same rack is more efficient as compared to the 
communication between DataNodes residing on different racks.  
➢ To reduce the network traffic during file  read/write , NameNode 
chooses the closest DataNode for serving the client read/write 
request.  
➢ NameNode maintains  rack  ids of each DataNode to achieve this 
rack information.  
➢ This concept of choosing the closest DataNode based on the rack 
information is known as  Rack  Awareness . 
Blocks:   A Block is the minimum amount of data that it can read or write. 
HDFS blocks are 128 MB by default and this is configurable. Files n 
HDFS are broken into block -sized chunks,which are stored as 
independent . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Client : READ Data from HDFS : 
 
➢ The client opens a connection to the NameNode  by using the Hadoop 
DistributedFileSystem API. The Hadoop DistributedFileSystem API 
provides methods for interacting with the NameNode and 
DataNodes.  
➢ A client initiates read request by calling ‘open()’  method of 
FileSystem object; it is an object of type DistributedFileSystem . 
➢ The client requests the location of the data blocks by calling 
the getFileBlockLocations()  method on the Hadoop 
DistributedFileSystem API. The  getFileBlockLocations()  method 
returns an array of BlockLocation objects. Each BlockLocation 
object contains the address of the DataNode that is storing a data 
block . 
➢ This object connects to namenode using RPC and gets metadata 
information such as the locations of the blocks of the file. Please note 
that these addresses are of first few blocks of a file.  

 
 
 
 
 ➢ In response to this metadata request, addresses of the DataNodes 
having a copy of that block is returned back.  
➢ The NameNode returns the locations of the data blocks to the client. 
The NameNode keeps track of the location of all the data blocks in 
HDFS. It uses this information to answer requests from clients about 
the location of data blocks.  
➢ Once addresses of DataNodes are received, an object of type 
FSDataInputStream  is returned to the client.  
➢ FSDataInputStream  contains DFSInputStream  which takes care 
of interactions with DataNode and NameNode.  
➢ In step 4 shown in the above diagram, a client invokes ‘read()’  
method which causes DFSInputStream  to establish a connection 
with the first DataNode with the first block of a file.  
➢ Data is read in the form of streams wherein client invokes ‘read()’  
method repeatedly.  
➢ The client reassembles the data blocks into a file. The client uses the 
Hadoop InputStream API to reassemble the data blocks into a file.  
➢ The Hadoop client can read and write data from and to HDFS in 
parallel. This is because the client can connect to multiple DataNodes 
at the same time. This allows the client to read and write data from 
and to HDFS very quickly.  
➢ This process of read()  operation continues till it reaches the end of 
block.  
➢ Once the end of a block is reached, DFSInputStream closes the 
connection and moves on to locate the next DataNode for the next 
block  
➢ Once a client has done with the reading, it calls a close()  method.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Client: WRIT E Data to HDFS:  
 
➢ The client opens a connection to the NameNode  by using the 
Hadoop DistributedFileSystem API. The Hadoop 
DistributedFileSystem API provides methods for interacting with 
the NameNode and DataNodes.  
➢ A client initiates write operation by calling ‘create()’ method of 
DistributedFileSystem object which creates a new file – Step no. 1 
in the above diagram.  
• DistributedFileSystem object connects to the NameNode using RPC 
call and initiates new file creation. However, this file creates 
operation does not associate any blocks with the file. It is the 
responsibility of NameNode to verify that the file (which is being 
created) does not exist already and a client has correct permissions 
to create a n ew file. If a file already exists or client does not have 
sufficient permission to create a new file, then IOException  is 

 
 
 
 
 thrown to the client. Otherwise, the operation succeeds and a new 
record for the file is created by the NameNode.  
• Once a new record in NameNode is created, an object of type 
FSDataOutputStream is returned to the client. A client uses it to 
write data into the HDFS. Data write method is invoked (step 3 in 
the diagram).  
• FSDataOutputStream contains DFSOutputStream object which 
looks after communication with DataNodes and NameNode. While 
the client continues writing data, DFSOutputStream  continues 
creating packets with this data. These packets are enqueued into a 
queue which is called as DataQueue . 
• There is one more component called DataStreamer  which 
consumes this DataQueue . DataStreamer also asks NameNode for 
allocation of new blocks thereby picking desirable DataNodes to be 
used for replication.  
• Now, the process of replication starts by creating a pipeline using 
DataNodes. In our case, we have chosen a replication level of 3 and 
hence there are 3 DataNodes in the pipeline.  
• The DataStreamer pours packets into the first DataNode in the 
pipeline.  
• Every DataNode in a pipeline stores packet received by it and 
forwards the same to the second DataNode in a pipeline.  
• Another queue, ‘Ack Queue’ is maintained by DFSOutputStream to 
store packets which are waiting for acknowledgment from 
DataNodes.  
• Once acknowledgment for a packet in the queue is received from all 
DataNodes in the pipeline, it is removed from the ‘Ack Queue’. In 
the event of any DataNode failure, packets from this queue are used 
to reinitiate the operation.  
 
 
 
 
 • After a client is done with the writing data, it calls a close() method 
(Step 9 in the diagram) Call to close(), results into flushing 
remaining data packets to the pipeline followed by waiting for 
acknowledgment.  
• Once a final acknowledgment is received, NameNode is contacted 
to tell it that the file write operation is complete.  
 
 
Advantages of HDFS:  
1. Scalability:  HDFS is designed to store and process large volumes 
of data, making it highly scalable. It can easily handle petabytes and 
even exabytes of data.  
2. Fault tolerance:  HDFS is fault -tolerant, meaning that it can 
continue to function even in the event of hardware or software 
failures. It does this by replicating data across multiple nodes, 
ensuring that there is always a copy available.  
3. Cost -effective:  HDFS is an open -source technology that can be run 
on commodity hardware, making it a cost -effective solution for big 
data storage and procession  
 
Disadvantages of HDFS:  
1. High latency:  HDFS has high latency due to the overhead of 
replicating data across multiple nodes. This can lead to slower 
performance when reading or writing data.  
2. Not suitable for small files:  HDFS is designed for storing and 
processing large files, and it is not optimized for small files. This 
means that it may not be the best choice for applications that deal 
with a large number of small files  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Working with HDFS (Commands)  
 
  
➢ Working with Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) 
involves using a set of commands to interact with the file 
system.  
➢ These commands are executed through the Hadoop command -
line interface (CLI) or other interfaces provided by Hadoop  
distributions.  
➢ Before working  with HDFS you need  to 
Deploy  Hadoop(installation) . Below are some commonly used 
HDFS commands along with explanations of their functionality:  
➢ FS relates to a generic file system  
➢ hadoop fs: It is used when we are dealing with different file 
systems such as Local FS, HDFS etc.  
➢ hdfs dfs: It is used when we are dealing for operations related to 
HDFS.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 To check the Hadoop services are up and running use the following command:  
jps 
 
 
                 Command To Star t:  $ start -dfs.sh  
 
 
➢ LS: It is a Command to display the list of Files and Directories 
in HDFS.  
                                          Syntax :  hdfs dfs –ls / 
 

 
 
 
 
  
➢ Mkdir:  HDFS Command to create the directory in HDFS.  
 
                               Syntax :        hdfs dfs –mkdir / directory_name  
                              Example :     hdfs dfs –mkdir /new_edureka  
 
Note:  Here we are trying to create a directory named 
“new_edureka” in HDFS.  
➢ Touchz:  HDFS Command to create a Empty file in HDFS with 
file size 0 bytes.  
                       Syntax:   :  hdfs dfs –touchz  /directory/filename  
                      Example:  hdfs dfs –touchz /new_edureka/sample  

 
 
 
 
  
Note:  Here we are trying to create a file named “sample” in the directory 
“new_edureka” of hdfs  with file size 0 bytes.  
 
➢ copyFromLocal  Or put : HDFS Command to copy the file from a 
Local file system to HDFS.  
          Syntax:  hdfs dfs -copyFromLocal <localsrc> <hdfs 
destination>   
           
Example:  hdfs dfs copyFromLocal/home/edureka/test/new_edureka  
 

 
 
 
 
 Note:  Here the test is the file present in the local directory /home/edureka 
and after the command gets executed the test file will be copied in 
/new_edureka directory of HDFS.  
 
➢ copyToLocal  or get : HDFS Command to copy the file from HDFS 
to Local File System.  
 
             Syntax : hdfs  dfs -copyToLocal <hdfs source> <localdst>  
           
Example : hdfs  dfs copyToLocal /new_edureka/test /home/edureka  
 
Note:  Here test is a file present in the new_edureka  directory of 
HDFS and after the command gets executed the test file will be 
copied to local directory /home/edureka  
➢ Count : HDFS Command to count the number of directories, files, 
and bytes under the paths that match the specified file pattern.  
                         Syntax : hdfs dfs -count <path>  
                        Example : hdfs dfs –count /user  

 
 
 
 
  
➢ rm: HDFS Command to remove the file from HDFS.  
                                Syntax : hdfs dfs –rm <path>      
                          Example :  hdfs dfs –rm /new_edureka/test  
 
 
➢ rm -r: HDFS Command to remove the entire directory and all of its 
content from HDFS.  
                                                Syntax:  hdfs dfs  -rm -r <path>  
                                              Example : hdfs dfs -rm -r  /new_edureka  

 
 
 
 
  
 
➢ cp: HDFS Command to copy files from source to destination. This 
command allows multiple sources as well, in which case the 
destination must be a directory.  
                                    Syntax : hdfs dfs -cp <src> <dest>  
                       Example : hdfs dfs -cp /user/hadoop/file1 /user/hadoop/file2  
 
 
➢ mv: HDFS Command to move files from source to destination. This 
command allows multiple sources as well, in which case the destination 
needs to be a directory.  
                              Syntax:   hdfs  dfs -mv <src> <dest>  
                 Example: :  hdfs  dfs -mv /user/hadoop/file1 /user/hadoop/file2  
 
➢ rmdir:  HDFS Command to remove the directory.  
                                     Syntax:  hdfs dfs -rmdir  <path>  
                             Example:  hdfs dfs –rmdir  /user/ Hadoop  

 
 
 
 
 rmr:  This command deletes a file from HDFS recursively . It is very 
useful command when you want to delete a non-empty directory . 
                 bin/hdfs dfs -rmr <filename/directoryName>  
 
➢ cat: HDFS Command that reads a file on HDFS and prints the 
content of that file to the standard output.  
                            Syntax:  hdfs dfs –cat /path/to/file_in_hdfs  
                           Example::  hdfs dfs –cat /new_edureka/test  
 
These are just a few examples of the many HDFS commands 
available. Note that the specific commands and syntax might vary 
depending on the Hadoop distribution and version . 

