--- PAGE 1 ---
UNIT -III
Law relating toelectronic records and intellectual property rights in
India :Legal aspects ofElectronic records /Digital signatures, Cyber
laws, theroles and regulations ofCertifying Authorities inIndia,
Protection ofIntellectual Property Rights inCyberspace inIndia .
TEXT BOOK:
1. Cyber Laws and IT Protection, Harish Chander, PHI, 2012
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter 4: Legal aspects of Electronic records / Digital signatures
Recognition of Electronic Records
Under Indian law, information can be in writing or type written form or printed 
form or electronic form.
Section 4, IT Act, 2000 provides legal recognition to electronic records and accepted 
in an electronic form.
This is based on Article -5 of UNCITRAL(United Nations Commission on International 
Trade Law), which states that any information cannot be denied if it in the data 
message form.
Even in the US, the Uniform Electronic Transaction Act, Section 201 states the 
same.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 3 ---
UNCITRAL Model law 
Article 6 states the basic standards to be met by a data message.
In many jurisdictions, writing, original and signature overlap, but model law 
approaches them as three separate and different concepts.
But they share common structure and should be read together.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 4 ---
The legal recognition of Electronic/Digital signatures
In Indian Law –Any information shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or 
signed(hand written) document or electronic signature.
➢In Article 7 of UNCITRAL Model law –signature is used to
-Method used to identify the person and indicate person’s approval
-Data message is reliable for communication and also includes relevant 
agreement.
-The person is associated with that content and endorse authorship of the text
-The person was in the given place at that time.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 5 ---
➢The Position in the US
In US Law, Electronic signature means signature in electronic form and it is logically 
associated with an electronic record.
-In US law, signature means any symbol, sound, process or encryption or a record 
in whole or in part adopted by a person with an intent 
-identify the party
-adopt or accept a term or record
-information integrity
-authenticity/validity
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 6 ---
➢The position in Australia 
In Court view, signature does not necessarily be handwritten. In some cases initial 
is sufficient.
--printed name only sent by telex was considered
-Ordinary means personally signed it, or mark by a pen or by a stamp.
Person sign means
-Method used to identify the person and indicate person’s approval
-The person is associated with that content, content may be written by someone 
else.
-The person was in the given place at that time.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Electronic Records and Electronic Signatures/Digital Signatures and 
their use by the government and its agencies in India
InIndia, Where anylawprovides –
(a)The filing ofany form, application orany document byany office, authority,
body oragency owned orcontrolled bytheappropriate govt .
(b)The issue orgrant ofany license, permit, sanction orapproval ofwhatever
name called inaparticular manner
(c)The receipt orpayment ofmoney(fees orcharges) inaparticular manner,
bymeans ofelectronic form asprescribed bytheappropriate government .(Section
6,ITAct, 2000 )
For the efficient service tothe public through electronic means authorise any
service provider setup, maintain and upgrade thecomputerised facilities .
Due toincrease inthegrowth ofcommerce and business, thegovt .should increase
function with thehelp ofelectronic records and electronic signatures .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 8 ---
The provisions like filing the form, application orother documents, creation,
retention orpreservation ofrecords, issue orgrant ofany license orpermit or
receipt orpayment ingovt .offices, need tobedone inelectronic form inorder to
give more efficiency tothefunctioning ofthegovt .and itsagencies .
➢Retention ofelectronic records inIndia
-Information remains accessible and usable forasubsequent reference .
-The way inwhich itisgenerated orreceived format, same canberetrieved
-Details like origin, destination, date and time facilitate toidentify electronic
record .
Note :This clause does not apply for any information which isautomatically
generated
(Section 7,ITAct, 2000 )
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 9 ---
➢UNCITRAL Model law relating to retention of data messages
Article 10 of UNCITRAL Model law provides
-Information remains accessible and usable forasubsequent reference .
-The data message isretained intheformat inwhich itwas generated orreceived
orsent .
-Details like origin, destination, date and time facilitate toidentify electronic
record .
Note :storage oftransmitted information often done bysomeone else rather than
originator, such asintermediary (third party/database) .Ifthe person does not
retain the required information, then itisintended asbad practice orwillful
misconduct .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 10 ---
➢Position in the US
Under the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, section 205 deals with provisions 
for retention of electronic record. Requirements under law -
-Information remains accessible and usable forasubsequent reference .
-The data message isretained intheformat inwhich itwas generated orreceived
orsent .
-Details like origin, destination, date and time facilitate toidentify electronic
record .
Note :Information may become unavailable because ofstorage and become
incapable ofreproducing the information .This isconsidered astechnology
obsolescence .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 11 ---
➢The Central Government’s Power to make Rules in India
The rules central govt. may frame w.r.to electronic/digital signatures are
-The type of signature
-The manner and format in which it shall be affixed
-The manner or procedure which facilitates the identification of the person
-Control procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and confidentiality of 
electronic records and payments.
The central govt. framed rules in the year 2004.
Rule 3 is about filing the form, application or document by the appropriate person 
using the specified software.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 12 ---
The following things are taken into account w.r.to electronic records:
-Lifetime
-Preservability
-Accessibility
-Readability
-Comprehensibility in respect of linked information
-Authentication and integrity
-And any license, permit, sanction or approval
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 13 ---
➢Electronic Records: Attribution Acknowledgement and Dispatch in India
Based on Article 13 of UNCITRAL Model law
-if electronic record was sent by the originator himself
-by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of originator
-Automatically generated (system programmed) 
➢Acknowledgement of receipt of electronic record in India
Under Article 14 of UNCITRAL Model law provides
-system generated mails (do not reply)
-Stimulate time reply (otherwise treat that mail was not received)
-Return receipt requested ( postal systems)
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 14 ---
➢The Time and place ofdispatch and receipt ofelectronic records inIndia
Under Article 15ofUNCITRAL Model lawprovides
otherwise agreed between the originator and the addressee, the time of
receipt ofanelectronic record shall bedetermined asfollows, namely –
(a)iftheaddressee has designated acomputer resource forthepurpose of
receiving electronic records
(i)receipt occurs atthe time when the electronic record enters the
designated computer resource ; or
(ii)iftheelectronic record issent toacomputer resource oftheaddressee
that isnot the designated computer resource, receipt occurs atthe time
when theelectronic record isretrieved bytheaddressee ;
(b)ifthe addressee has not designated acomputer resource along with
specified timings, ifany, receipt occurs when theelectronic record enters the
computer resource oftheaddressee .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 15 ---
For the purposes of this section –
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the 
principal place of business shall be the place of business;
(b) if the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual 
place of residence shall be deemed to be the place of business;
(c) “Usual Place of Residence”, in relation to a body corporate, means the place 
where it is registered.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Chapter 5: T he roles and regulations of Certifying Authorities in India
Due toincreased use ofelectronic communications, misuse ofthe electronic
records and digital signatures also increased, because there isnodirect face-to-face
interaction inthe electronic transaction, the problems concerning identity,
authenticity and integrity arise from thepoint ofview oflawand lawyers .
-Digital signature isused bythe business community for securing electronic
records .
Intheprocess ofcryptography, apublic keyinfrastructure consisting ofcertification
authorities astrusted third parties, forsharing public keys inanauthenticated and
reliable manner .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 17 ---
The Role of Certifying Authority (CA)
The Certifying Authority (CA) acts asatrusted third party inthe public key
infrastructure .
-CAplays important role –istocertify the public key associated with the given
individual .
The general characteristics areasfollows :
-The authenticity ofthesubject participating inthecommercial communication .
-The integrity ofthe message communicated orthe communication .The
authenticity, integrity and confidentiality can beensured bythe independent
third party, that istherole ofCAunder thelaw.
-The certifying authority can bepublic authority orprivate authority .Present the
state govt .agencies actastop level CAs who inturn certify the second tier of
private sector CAs.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Problems:
-The CAs operations are automatic and may be exposed to many computer based 
risks.
-System failures –loss of keys
-If CA’s private key is compromised, then corresponding public key can be revoked, 
then all the certificates issued would be invalid.
So, CA must also make its own public key available to the parties who want to verify 
the certificates of consumers or users and if CA fails to perform its duties , results 
significant loss to large number of innocent parties. 
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 19 ---
➢Appointment of controller and his functions
➢Obtaining license to issue Electronic/Digital signature certificates in India
➢Renewal and suspension of license of the certifying authority
➢Procedure for the grant or rejection of license to the certifying authority
➢Some procedures and security guidelines for certifying authorities
➢Procedure and prior requirements for surrender of license, and cessation as certifying authority
➢Duties of certifying authorities for disclosure of information
➢Electronic Signature certificate to be issued by certifying authorities
➢Suspension of electronic/digital signature certificate
➢Archiving electronic/digital signature certificates
➢Revocation of electronic/digital signature certificates
➢Rules of compromise and revocation of electronic/digital signature certificates
➢The rules of confidential Information and access to confidential information
➢Duties of subscribers under the law –Generating key pair
➢The concept of acceptance of electronic/digital certificate by the subscriber
➢The importance of the control of private key by the subscriber
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Chapter 6: Protection of Intellectual Property Rights in Cyberspace in India
➢The Cyberspace
-Internet has made itpossible toreplace traditional paper based communications by
paperless communication which does notknow physical orgeographical boundaries, andis
available toanypartofglobe between theparties known orunknown toeach other .
-Information stored inelectronic form ischeaper, easy tostore, retrieve andspeedier to
communicate .
-The advantages oftheinternet have naturally attracted many business people toconduct
thebusiness through e-commerce .
-Thechallenges thatthelawhasfaced intherecent years ishow totackle thedevelopment
ofintellectual property ontheinternet while preventing itsunauthorized exploitation .
-New works need copy right protection, notcovered under copyright Act, 1957 .
-For protecting intellectual property, bytherule ofgovt.,World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) and World Trade Organization (WTO) arebrought under one
umbrella .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 21 ---
-Anattempt ismade tobalance theinterest oftheintellectual property owner and
interest ofintellectual property users byensuring the adequate returns ontheir
invested knowledge tothe intellectual property owners and toincrease social
benefits from unrestricted access toknowledge bytheintellectual property users .
-These aspects are clearly mentioned inthe agreement onTRIPs(Trade Related
aspects ofIntellectual Property Rights) .
-TRIPs agreement impose minimum standards onpatents, copyright, trademarks
and thetrade secrets .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 22 ---
➢The Relevance of Domain Names in Intellectual Property Rights
-Before starting any online business activity, a company must be easily traceable on 
the internet. For this company must have a address in the cyberspace.
-Company must have a registration under a particular domain name and a website 
of its own.
-The Domain Name System (DNS) has made it possible, which enables a company 
to conduct online transactions and make it easily traceable by the customers, 
suppliers and other users.
-It is difficult to remember all numeric IP addresses and therefore domain name 
has a major role.
-The representation of the company’s name and address on the internet can serve 
as a typical trademark function for showing company’s recognition and goodwill 
in the market place.
-The type of attack possible w.r.to is “Cybersquatting”
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 23 ---
➢Deception by squatting in cyberspace
The term cybersquatting refers totheunauthorized registration and useofInternet
domain names that areidentical orsimilar totrademarks, service marks, company
names, orpersonal names .Cybersquatting registrants obtain and use thedomain
name with thebad faith intent toprofit from thegoodwill oftheactual trademark
owner .
They usespecial software applications tomonitor theexpiry ofsome specific
domain names .After registering the expired domain names, cyber squatters
duplicate theoriginal websites and thus misleading thegenuine visitors ofsuch
websites
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 24 ---
-The consumer when looking tofind thename ofthebrand ontheinternet, theeasiest way
forthem istotype adomain name ofthebrand orthecompany .
-Generally, inIndia, adomain name hasatleast two keyparts .The second level domain
describes like .Com or.Gov andthird level domain contains familiar name that describes
product, service ortopic thatthewebsite address .
-Inthisconnection itmay bepointed outthattheInternet Corporation ofAssigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN) has adopted apolicy called Uniform Domain Name Dispute
Resolution Policy (UDRP) which offers anexpedited administrative proceedings for
trademark holders tocontent‘abusive registration ofdomainnames’ which provides
cancellation, suspension ortransfer ofadomain name bytheregistrar .
-The advantages oftheICANN’s dispute system areitsquick resolution ofdisputes and
relatively low costs .IntheICANN’s policy theparties may even conduct theentire
proceeding through electronic filings .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 25 ---
➢Bad Faith in Relation to Domain Name Infringement
Inorder toestablish “badfaith” intheproceeding forinfringement ofadomain name acomplainant hasto
establish thefollowing points inorder toobtain relief :
•Respondent’s domain name isidentical orconfusingly similar toatrademark orservice mark inwhich the
complainant hasright .
•Respondent hasnoright orlegitimate interest inrespect ofthedomain name .
•Respondent’s domain name hasbeen registered andisbeing used inbadfaith.
Inorder tofileadministrative proceedings successfully thecomplaint must prove thateach oftheabove three
elements arepresent forthepurpose ofproof ofbadfaith onthepartofthedefendant .
Ithasalso tobeshown thatthecomplainant haditsregistered domain name andthedefendant isusing itinbad
faith.
•Registering thedomain name with theprimary aimofsubsequently selling itataprofit .
•Registering thedomain name primarily fordisrupting thebusiness ofthecompetitor .
•Registering thedomain name inorder toprevent theowner ofthetrade mark from reflecting themark ina
corresponding domain name .
•Using thedomain name toattract internet users toone’s website bycreating alikelihood ofconfusion with the
complainant’s trademark .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 26 ---
➢Some Leading Cases Involving Complaints From India before WIPO
•Before World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), thenumber ofcomplaints have been
filed inIndian corporate houses ormedia companies .
•Inmost ofthecases theIndian complaints involving domain names before WIPO have been
decided infavor ofthecomplaints .
•Wemay citetwocases .
•InTata Sons Ltd.V.The advanced information Technology Association, itwas decided bythe
WIPO Administrative panel, Instructing Network Solutions Inc.totransfer theimpugned domain
name tata.orgtothecomplainant Tata Sons Ltd.
•The administrative panel listrelied onthedecisions thathadbeen earlier given infavour ofTata
Sons Ltd.BytheIndian courts providing protection totheTata trademark from abusive
registrations .
•Similarly intridenthotels .com case thecomplainant was Oberoi hotels which owned trade marks
‘Trident’ and‘TridentHotels’ inIndia .Inthiscase thepanel held thattheuseoftheword‘Trident’
incombination with theword hotels hasacertain distinctive character asitindicates achain hotels
such asthecomplainants group .
•Thedomain name tridenthotels .com signifies thatthedomain name wasintended tobeused fora
chain ofhotels .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 27 ---
➢Protection of Copyright on Cyberspace
Thenew technology which ismulti -functional ITortheInternet poses number ofchallenges forlaws
toprotect copyrights .Copyright being anintellectual property gives right totheauthors inliteracy,
artistic, dramatic andmusical works .
Asinother intellectual property rights available under thecopyright areessential negative innature,
similarly these arebasically therights tostop others from doing certain things asforexample, right to
stop privacy, counterfeit, copying orimitation .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 28 ---
➢Rights of Software Copyright Owners
We have brief pointed out the rights of the copyright owner as provided for under Section 14 of the 
copyright Act, 1957. Here we will explain to understand the copyrights particularly of the software 
copyright owners.
•First theauthor ofthes/whastheright toreproduce andmake anynumber ofcopies ofhiswork as
hehikes .
•Secondly thes/wcopyright owner may display hissoftware ontheinternet which would amount to
display tothepublic which right isprovided .
•The owner ofthecopyright s/wenjoys anexclusive right todistributed copies ofthework tothe
public bysale orbytransfer ofownership orbyrental .This right todistribute inIndia flows from
Section 14oftheCopyright Act, 1957 ,which provides theright topublication .
•Similarly, theowner oftheS/W copyright hastheright toadaption ofhiswork byupdating,
changing andmodifying hiss/wcopyright .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 29 ---
➢Cyber Space, the Internet, Websites and the Nature of the Copyright
Ontheinternet, thedigital nature perspective ofintellectual property laws isthemost important characteristics as
compared tothetraditional ‘analog’methods ofrecording ofworks ofintellectual property -onpaper, film, oron
magnetic tape whereas digitisation converts allwords, images, sounds, graphics andfilms into binary numbers,
either ones orzeros .
Awebsite creator must ensure thatheowns thecopyright inalltheaspects involved inthecreation ofwebsite for
itsfunctioning .
While downloading from theinternet thedefendant makes thepermanent copies ofthecopyrighted work onthe
hard discofthecomputer andthisamounts toareproduction ofthecopyright work .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 30 ---
➢Linking, Hyper -Linking and Framing
The internet ortheweb was initially created forthepurpose ofenabling hypertext capabilities
allowing onesidetolinkorhyperlink andaccess another sight .
Inthisway theuser could make sense ofthegreat mass data contained ontheinternet .
Aslinking orhyperlinking was used foreducation orresearch purpose, itwas both accepted and
encouraged when internet wasaresearch network .
Onthecommercial internet thesight owner have contended thatbefore employing alink, thewebsite
must seek permission from thewebsite towhich itwant tolink.
Framing isarelatively recent phenomenon ascompared tolinking .
Byusing aspecific command initsHTML code, aframing sitelinks toanother siteanddisplays that
sitewithin awindow orframe .
Theframe itself iscomprised ofcontent from theframing site.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 31 ---
➢Remedies forInfringement ofCopyright onCyberspace
Under thecopyright Act, 1957 ,fortheinfringement ofthecopyrighted works without alicense
granted bytheowner ofthecopyright ortheRegistrar .
Wehave three types ofremedies laws available .
(i) Civil remedies
(ii) Administrative remedies
(iii) Criminal remedies
Civil remedies may include twocategories
a)Preventive civil remedies
b)Compensatory remedies
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 32 ---
Preventive civil remedies
Under thecopyright Act, 1957 preventive civil remedies may include interlocutory injunction andthe
final injunction inthesuite forinfringement ofcopyright .
Injunction isthemost important remedy against theinfringement ofcopyright under thelaw.
Injunction means ajudicial process bywhich onewho isthreatening toinvade orhasinvade thelegal
orequitable rights ofanother .
Compensatory remedies
Acompensatory remedy isalso available totheplaintiff which includes damages, account ofprofit
anddelivery ofinfringing copies .
Damages aregranted toaowner ofthecopyright fortheloss ordamage caused tohim bythe
infringement ofcopyright .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 33 ---
➢The Liabilities of an Internet Services Provider (ISP) in Cyberspace
The liabilities ofISPs may arises inaverity oflegal areas, such ascriminal law, Torts law, Trade
secret law,Copyright law,Trademark law,Unfair Competition law.
Many countries have tried todefine theliability ofISOs indisseminating third party contents .
Thefunction ofservice provides istohost content, such asweb pages ofsubscriber, over which the
service provider exercises nocontrol .
Itisimpossible practically tomonitor orscreen theactivities ofusers ofnetwork services .
Forexample :Educational institutions, libraries andmuseums andservice providers, they should
have nolegal obligations tomonitor what istransmitted, orseek facts orcircumstance indicating
illegal activity .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 34 ---
➢Cyberspace and the protection of patent in India
▪The lawofpatents isvery relevant fortheinformation technology industry asitis
inother industries .
▪The owner ofapatent isgranted certain exclusive right toaparticular invention .
▪The rights ofpatent owner include the right tomake, the right touse, and the
right tosell the invention and also the obvious extensions connected with the
rights ofinventions .
▪Inthecomputer technology which isfast-paced, being thefirst todevelop and to
patent aninvention which satisfies the demand inamarket can provide
significant leverage over competitors .
▪The patent owners can also have anagreement toletothers make use ofthe
patented invention .
▪Wecanseetheeffects ofIBM’s (Indian Business Machines) decision tolicense the
operating system foritspersonal computer from acompany which has become
famous likeMicrosoft .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 35 ---
The term ‘patent’ refers to a grant of some privilege, property or authority made by 
the government or the country to one or more individuals.
The person to whom a patent is granted is called patentee. 
In India, under the law, a patent is a –
•Right granted by the government 
•To exclude others
•From engaging in activities such as making, using, importing, offering to sell or 
selling an invention
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.

--- PAGE 36 ---
➢Patent as a form of Intellectual Property
Patent came on the status book as the Patents Act, 1970.
The Indian laws have provided judicial as well as administrative protection in order 
to protect intellectual property.
There are two kinds of remedies or protection for infringements of IPRs.
Civil remedies -to pay for damages and to apologise to the owner of IPRs.
Criminal –fine or imprisonment
For determining infringement of design patent
The court will first decide whether the two products are of the same kind. If not, 
there can be no comparison.
When two products are of the same kind, then the court will further compare 
whether the accused product is the same as the patent product.
If both are same, then infringement of the patent is established.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, CSE Dept.