--- PAGE 1 ---
Introduction to Computer Security, Internet, E -commerce and E -governance with 
reference to Free Market Economy
Definition, Threats to security, Government requirements, Information Protection and 
Access Controls, Computer security efforts, Standards, Computer Security mandates 
and legislation, Privacy considerations, International security activity.
Conceptual Framework of E -commerce: governance, the role of Electronic Signatures 
in E-commerce with Reference to Free Market Economy in India.
Textbooks
1.Debby Russell and Sr. G.T Gangemi , "Computer Security Basics (Paperback)”, 2ndEdition, O’ Reilly 
Media, 2006. Computer Security Basics -Google Books
2.Cyber Laws and IT Protection, Harish Chander , PHI, 2012
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 2 ---
Introduction to computer Security
computer security ,the protection ofcomputer systems and information from
harm, theft, and unauthorized use.Computer hardware istypically protected by
thesame means used toprotect other valuable orsensitive equipment .
The security precautions related tocomputer information and access address four
major threats :
(1)theft ofdata ,such asthat ofmilitary secrets from government computers ;
(2)vandalism, including thedestruction ofdata byacomputer virus ;
(3)fraud, such asemployees atabank channeling funds into their own accounts ;
and
(4)invasion ofprivacy, such astheillegal accessing ofprotected personal financial
ormedical data from alarge database .
Continues…
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 3 ---
The laws make it a crime to reveal personal information gathered 
during business.
➢Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
➢Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
The organizations which provide assistance w.r.to attacks over internet:
➢Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
➢Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT)
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) help in developing the 
best practices for protecting critical infrastructures and minimizing 
vulnerabilities.
Continues…
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 4 ---
Computer crime isanact performed byaknowledgeable computer user,
sometimes called a"hacker ,"that illegally browses orsteals acompany's or
individual's private information .Sometimes, this person orgroup ofindividuals may
bemalicious and destroy orotherwise corrupt thecomputer ordata files.
Examples :
•Child pornography -Making, distributing, storing, or viewing child pornography.
•Click fraud -Fraudulent clicks on Internet advertisements.
•Copyright violation -Stealing or using another person's Copyrighted material 
without permission.
•Cracking -Breaking or deciphering codes designed to protect data.
Ref:What isComputer Crime? (computerhope .com)Continues…
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 5 ---
Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability (CIA)
Computer and Network security is build on 3 -pillars, C -I-A.
Confidentiality -preventing the disclosure of data to unauthorized parties.
Also keep the identity of authorized parties involved in sharing and holding data 
private and anonymous.
Often confidentiality is compromised by cracking poorly encrypted data, Man -in-
the-middle (MITM) attacks, disclosing sensitive data.
Standard measures to establish confidentiality include:
1.Data encryption
2.Two-factor authentication
3.Biometric verification
4.Security tokens
Continues…
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 6 ---
Integrity
Integrity refers to protecting 
information from being modified by 
unauthorized parties. 
Standard measures to guarantee 
integrity include:
1.Cryptographic checksums
2.Using file permissions
3.Data backupsAvailability 
Availability is making sure that authorized 
parties are able to access the information 
when needed.
Standard measures to guarantee 
availability include:
1.Backing up data to external drives
2.Implementing firewalls
3.Having backup power supplies
4.Data redundancy
Continues…
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 7 ---
Identification, Authentication, Authorization and Accountability
These areother terms butpart ofCIAmodel
Identification describes amethod ofensuring that auser istheentity it
claims tobe.Identification canbeprovided with theuseofausername
oraccount number .
Authentication Prove you areXYZ, using multifactor authentication like
password, biometric, passport, IDetc.
Authorization What areyou allowed toaccess?
Accountability (also referred asAuditing)
Trace anaction toaUser’s Identity
Prove Who/what agiven action was perform by(non -repudiation)
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 8 ---
Threats to Security
Vulnerability –weakness in a system
Threat –possible danger to the system
Countermeasures –techniques for protecting the system
Vulnerabilities
➢Physical Vulnerabilities –intruder breaks into buildings & 
equipment/server room
➢Natural Vulnerabilities –computers vulnerable to natural disasters (fire, 
flood, earthquakes, power loss) and environmental threats.(Dust, humidity, 
uneven temp.)
➢Hardware and software Vulnerabilities
➢Media Vulnerabilities –Damaged backup media
➢Communication Vulnerabilities -interception
➢Human Vulnerabilities –poorly trained administrator
Continues…
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 9 ---
Threats
➢Natural and physical threats –threats related to fire, flood, power 
failures and other disasters. 
Can’t prevent such disasters but can be detected quickly using fire 
alarms, sensors etc. 
➢Unintentional threats –ignorance creates dangers
More information is compromised, corrupted or lost through ignorance 
➢Intentional threats –outsiders and insiders
Countermeasures
➢Computer security
➢Communication security
➢Physical security
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 10 ---
Government requirements
The computer vendors who want to sell lot of work stations to govt., 
they are forced to build security into those products.
-Most govt. agencies specify security requirements along with the 
operational requirements.
-The seller need to use encryption to protect stored and transmitted 
data.
-Information protection : govt. agencies need to protect sensitive info. 
From theft, modification, data breaches and need to ensure integrity of 
the information.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 11 ---
Information Protection and Access Controls
Access control isasecurity technique that regulates who orwhat can view oruse resources ina
computing environment .Itisafundamental concept insecurity that minimizes risk tothebusiness
ororganization .
There aretwo types ofaccess control :physical and logical .Physical access control limits access to
campuses, buildings, rooms and physical ITassets .Logical access control limits connections to
computer networks, system files and data .
Physical access control can belimited byaccess card readers, auditing and reports totrack
employee access torestricted business locations and proprietary areas, such asdata centers .Some
ofthese systems incorporate access control panels torestrict entry torooms and buildings, aswell
asalarms and lockdown capabilities, toprevent unauthorized access oroperations .
Logical access control systems perform identification authentication and authorization ofusers and
entities byevaluating required login credentials that can include passwords, personal identification
numbers, biometric scans, security tokens or other authentication factors .Multifactor
authentication (MFA ),which requires two ormore authentication factors, isoften animportant part
ofalayered defense toprotect access control systems .
Ref:What isAccess Control? (techtarget .com)
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 12 ---
Access control methods: 
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 13 ---
Computer security efforts
Inearly 1950 s,TEMPEST (theprocess ofprotecting sensitive equipment
from emanating electromagnetic radiation (EMR) that may carry
classified information )
-standards that strive to prevent outright data theft.
-1960s –Department of Defense , National Institute of standers and technology or 
NIST, national security agency first initiated public awareness of security.
-1967, DoD studied threats to computer systems and information
-Later Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) worked on identifying 
vulnerabilities and threats and introduced methods to safeguard systems and 
controlled access to defense computer systems, networks and information.
-1970, Security controls for computer systems –a document is published, which is 
landmark in the history of computer security
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 14 ---
Tiger Teams –In 1970s, first time emerged on computer scene.
These teams where govt. and industry sponsored teams of crackers.
They attempt to break down systems, security patches, flaws.
-Sponsored by DoD
-Penetration testing
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 15 ---
Standards for secure Systems
National Bureau of standards (NBS) , also known as the National 
Institute of standards and Technology (NIST), responsible for the 
development of all kinds of standards. 
-NBS sponsored conference on computer security in collaboration with 
ACM (Association of Computing Machinery).
-Required attention in three areas w.r.to:
-Policy : What security rules should be enforced for sensitive info?
-Mechanisms : What h/w and s/w mechanisms are needed to enforce 
the policy?
-Assurance : What need to be done for mechanisms to support the 
policy even when the system is subjected to threats?
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 16 ---
National Computer Security Center (NCSC)
The Center was founded with thefollowing goals :
•Encourage thewidespread availability oftrusted computer systems
•Evaluate the technical protection capabilities ofindustry -and government -
developed systems
•Provide technical support ofgovernment and industry groups engaged in
computer security research and development
•Develop technical criteria fortheevaluation ofcomputer systems
•Evaluate commercial systems
•Conduct and sponsor research incomputer and network security technology
•Develop and provide access toverification and analysis tools used todevelop and
test secure computer systems
•Conduct training inareas ofcomputer security
•Disseminate computer security information toother branches ofthe federal
government and toindustry
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 17 ---
Computer Security mandates and legislation
Laws typical aim is to protect information.
-protection of classified or sensitive information
Legislation mandating computer security practices byfederal agencies and con-tractors .
The idea ofthis legislation isthat organizations that process classified orsensitive
unclassified government information must becareful toprotect that information from
unauthorized access .
-computer crime
Legislation defining computer crime asanoffense and extending other regulations tocover
thefts and other abuses carried outbycomputers and other new techniques .Inaddition to
federal policies, virtually allU.S.states have enacted their own legislation prohibiting
computer crime and abuse .
-Privacy
Legislation protecting theprivacy ofinformation maintained about individuals (e.g.,health
and financial records) .Another consideration forcomputer privacy isthe practice of
merging records from multiple, seemingly benign databases into profiles that may reveal
devastating amounts ofinformation about anindividual .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 18 ---
Privacy Considerations
The ability tocollect and manage information doesn't necessarily confer theright
tosave, analyze, and publicize that information, butseveral recent attacks suggest
that this isoccurring .
Inone high profile case, anairline was approached and asked toturn over the
records ofmillions ofpassengers who had purchased tickets fortrips ontheairline .
Apparently the purpose was tocombine the flight plans ofcustomers with other
data available commercially, such asreports from credit bureaus, and determine
which fliers may fittheprofile ofaterrorist .
This isfeasible only ifyou can rapidly combine information from several different
databases, and that, intheview ofmany, represents amassive invasion ofprivacy .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 19 ---
International security activity
International security ,also called global security isaterm which refers tothemeasures
taken bystates and international organizations ,such asthe United Nations ,European
Union ,and others, toensure mutual survival and safety .These measures include military
action and diplomatic agreements such astreaties and conventions .International
and national security areinvariably linked .International security isnational security orstate
security intheglobal arena .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 20 ---
Chapter 2: Conceptual Framework of E -commerce: governance
➢Meaning of E -commerce
Traditional method –contracts specifically written onpaper documents .
The conduct ofbusiness andbusiness transactions ofanykind between the
parties ontheinternet andcyberspace iscalled e-commerce .
While starting business ontheinternet orcyber space, thefollowing
points need tobefollowed :
•Market research
•Financial commitment –legal agreement
•Should beaware ofproblems inthebusiness andtype oftransactions
•Should include certain terms &conditions inthecontract which are
profitable andfavorable .
•New business canbestarted with single owner rather than partnership .
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 21 ---
➢Growth and development of E -commerce
E-commerce have become popular especially inthecorporate sectors duetoscope
ofpublicity .
--During COVID -19andworldwide lockdown, e-commerce acted likeabackbone
forbusiness andmarket industry .
--notonly purchase goods butalsoavail services .
--Jurisdiction forinternet based disputes .
➢Definitions ofE-commerce
-The World Trade Organization defined as“e-commerce isthe production,
distribution, marketing, sales ordelivery ofgoods andservices byelectronic means”
-Theconsumer Protection Act, 2019 states, “buying orselling ofgoods orservices
including digital products over digital orelectronic network”
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 22 ---
➢Various Modes of E -commerce
E-commerce operates through four modes:
•Advertising, sale, lease or license of tangible products
Ex: Books, machinery, buildings, land, vehicles
•Advertising, sale, lease or license of intangible products
Ex: IPR, copyrights, goodwill, patent, e -newspaper, online storage.
•Advertising, sale, lease or license of services
Ex: online ticket booking, online games, online banking
•Advertising, sale, lease or license of tangible products over the internet
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 23 ---
➢Mechanism involved in the operation of Internet
All communicating devices are connected to the internet with there unique IP numbers.
Protocols like TCP/IP is used for data transmission.
Data is sent in the form of the packets, by using shortest path to destination.
For better security –packets are encrypted.
➢Types of players in E -commerce
•Network provider
•User
•Website
•Payment Providers
•Payment system provider
•Software Architects
•Advertiser
•Content Provider
•Back End systems
--other than these search engines like google, yahoo etc.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 24 ---
➢Salient features ofthe new consumer protection Act, 2019 :Law onE-
Commerce andconsumer protection
Some changes aretaken place after introduction ofonline ore-commerce inthe
consumer protection act,1986 .
Following arethefeatures ofConsumer Protection Act, 2019 :
1.Def.ofConsumer –person who “buys anygoods” and“hires oravails ofany
service”, butnotaperson who obtain goods forresale orcommercial purpose .
2.Def.ofe-commerce –inconsumer protection act,1986 was silent ononline
commercial transactions .ITAct, 2000 alsonotprovided adequate framework .
Butconsumer protection act,2019 defined e-commerce as“buying orselling of
goods orservices including digital products over adigital orelectronic network”
3. Specification of ‘Rights of Consumers’ –The Act expressed rights of consumers  
under Section 2(9) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 25 ---
4. Establishment of the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) : 
Sections 10 -27 of CPA, 2019
5. Key Concept of ‘Product Liability’ : Under Section 2(34) of CPA, 2019 –responsibility 
of a product seller or manufacturer or service.
6. Def. of ‘Electronic Service Provider’ : Under Section 2(17) of CPA, 2019 –the person 
provides technologies to enable a product seller to engage in advertise/ sell goods/services  
to a consumer include online marketplace or online auction sites.
7. Def. of ‘Misleading Advertisement’: An advertisement which falsely describes the 
product or service.
8. Establishment of Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission: Sections 28 –73 
provides setting up of a Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission (CDRC).
9. Special Provisions on offences and penalties Under CPA 2019: Sections 88 –93 
regarding misleading advertisements, -fines with imprisonment.
10. Introduction of Mediation as an alternate Dispute resolution mechanism: : Under 
Section 2(25) of CPA 2019 defined termed mediation –the process by which a mediator 
mediates the consumer disputes.
Sections 74 -81 –resolve the consumer dispute faster without approaching commissions.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 26 ---
➢Web Development and Hosting Agreements
➢Web Hosting
➢The Problem of Internet Jurisdiction
➢Illustrative Cases about cyberspace Jurisdiction
➢Types of websites 
Passive and interactive sites: These sites provide information in a read only 
format.
Interactive sites: These encourages the browser to enter information identifying the 
browser and provide back ground on the browser’s interest or buying habits.
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 27 ---
Chapter 3: The Role of Electronic Signatures in E -commerce with 
Reference to Free Market Economy in India
➢Introduction
➢Basic Laws of Digital and Electronic signature in India
➢Authentication of digital Signatures and electronic records
➢Authentication of electronic signatures and electronic records
➢UNCITRAL(United Nations Commission on International Trade 
Law) : Model law on electronic commerce, 1996
➢UNCITRAL: Draft rules of November, 1998
➢Securing electronic transactions cryptography and securing electronic 
transactions
➢The concept of Hash function
➢Utility of Digital signature’s verification
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE

--- PAGE 28 ---
➢Certification, certifying authorities and the status of electronic signature 
under the Indian Law
➢The appointment of controller and other officers and their functions
➢Authentication and verification of electronic/digital signatures
➢The cost and benefits of implementing electronic/digital signatures in E -
commerce in India
➢Security privacy of Electronic/Digital signatures
➢Private key Escrow and key recovery systems
➢Obligation of a certifying authority and certificate management
➢Security threats to cyberspace and E -commerce
➢International efforts to enact laws relating to electronic/digital signatures
➢Efforts in the US
➢Guidelines under the Singapore Electronic transaction Act, 1998
➢Different approaches of digital signatures
Dr. V. SOWMYA DEVI, Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE