
--- Page 1 ---
ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE
Unit -II: Advanced  Search

--- Page 2 ---
Unit -II: Advanced  Search
Constraint Satisfaction (Backtracking, Local Search)
Constructing  Search  Trees
Stochastic  Search 
A*  Search  Implementation
Minimax  Search
Alpha -Beta Pruning

--- Page 3 ---
Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP)
states evaluated by heuristics and goal test conform 
to a standard , structured  and simple 
representation
Constraint satisfaction problems or CSP s are 
mathematical  problems where one must find  
states or objects that satisfy  a number of 
constraints or criteria. 
A constraint is a restriction  of the feasible 
solutions in an optimization problem. 

--- Page 4 ---
Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP)
CSP is a problem composed of a 
finite set of variables , 
each of which has a finite domain  of values , and 
a set of constraints
Each constraint is defined over some subset of the 
original set of variables  and restricts  the values 
these variables can simultaneously take. 
The task is to find an assignment  of a value for 
each variable such that the assignments satisfy  all 
the constraints.

--- Page 5 ---
Example 1
 Example 2
Different classrooms are of 
different capacity and an 
examination can only be 
scheduled in a classroom 
that has enough seats for 
students who are going to 
take that examination
Some students may take 
part in several 
examinations and these 
examinations can not be 
scheduled in the same time 
slot.
Examples
--- Page 6 ---
Constraintsatisfaction problems
What isaCSP?


Finite setofvariables V1 ,V2 ,…,Vn
Finite setofconstrains    C1,C2,…,Cm
Nonemtpy domain ofpossible values foreach variable
DV1,DV2,…DVn
EachconstraintCilimitsthevaluesthatvariablescan
take,e.g.,V1≠V2

A stateisdefinedasanassignmentofvaluestosomeor 
allvariables.
Consistentassignment:assignmentdoesnotviolatethe
constraints.

--- Page 7 ---
Constraintsatisfactionproblems
Anassignmentis complete wheneveryvalueis 
mentioned.
A solutionto aCSP isacomplete assignmentthat
satisfiesallconstraints.
SomeCSPsrequireasolutionthatmaximize san
objective function.
Applicati ons:Schedulingthetimeofobservationsonthe
HubbleSpaceTelescope,Floorplanning,Mapcoloring,
Cryptography



--- Page 8 ---
Constraintsatisfactionproblems

--- Page 9 ---
CSPexample:mapcoloring


Variables:WA,NT, Q,NSW, V, SA,T
Domains:Di={red,green,blue}
Constraints:adjacentregions musthave differentcolors.
E.g.WANT (if thelanguageallowsthis)
E.g.(WA,NT) ={(red,green),(red,blue),(green,red),…}
 

--- Page 10 ---
CSPexample:mapcoloring
Solutions areassignments satisfyingallconstraints,e.g.
{WA=red,NT=green,Q =red,NSW=green,V=red,SA=blue,T=green}

--- Page 11 ---
Constraintgraph
CSP benefits


Standard representation pattern
Genericgoalandsuccessorfunctions
Genericheuristics(nodomain
specificexperti se).
Constraintgraph =nodesare variables, edgesshowconstraints.
Graphcanbeusedtosimplifysearch.
e.g.Tasmaniaisanindependentsubprob lem.
--- Page 12 ---
Backtrack ingSearch
 aka Brute -Force Search
12■It is similar to Depth-firstsearch
■Choos esvaluesforonevariableatatimeand 
backtrackswhenavariablehasno legal
values lefttoassign.
■Uninforme dalgorithm
□Nogoodgeneralperformance(seetablep.143)
--- Page 13 ---
Backtrack ingsearch
functionBACKTRACKING -SEARCH(csp)returnasolutionorfailure
returnRECURSIVE-BACKTRACKING ({}, csp)
functionRECURSIVE-BACKTRACKING(assignment,csp)returnasolutionorfailure
ifassignmentiscompletethenreturnassignment
varSELECT-UNASSIGNED-VARIABLE(VARIABLES[csp],assignment,csp)
foreachvalue inORDER-DOMAIN-VALUES(var,assignment,csp)do
ifvalue isconsistent withassignmentaccording toCONSTRAINTS[csp]then
add {var=value}to assignment
resultRRECURSIVE-BACTRACKING (assignment, csp)
ifresultfailurethenreturnresult
remove{var=value}fromassignment
return failure
--- Page 14 ---
Backtrack ingsearch

--- Page 15 ---
Backtrack ingsearch

--- Page 16 ---
Backtrack ingexample
Variables:WA,NT, Q,NSW, V, SA,T
Domains:Di={red,green,blue}
Constraints:adjacentregions musthave differentcolors.
E.g.WANT (if thelanguageallowsthis)
E.g.(WA,NT) ={(red,green),(red,blue),(green,red),…}
--- Page 17 ---
Backtrack ingexample
17 TLo(IRIDIA) October 13,2015
--- Page 18 ---
Backtrack ingexample

--- Page 19 ---
Backtrack ingexample

--- Page 20 ---
Improvingbacktrackingefficiency
■Previousimprove ments→introduceheuristics
■General-purpose methodscan give huge gainsin 
speed:
□Whichvariableshouldbeassignednext?
□Inwhatordershoulditsvaluesbetried?
□Canwedetectinevitablefailureearly?
□Canwetakeadvantageofproblemstructure?
--- Page 21 ---
Local Search
They apply mostly to problems for which we don't  
need to know the path  to the solution but only the 
solution  itself. 
They operate using a single state or a small 
number of states and explore the neighbors of 
that state. They usually don't store the path. 
A particular case are optimization problems for 
which we search for the best solution according 
to an objective  function. 
The distribution  of values  of the objective 
function in the state space is called a landscape . 
--- Page 22 ---
Local Beam Search
In this algorithm, it holds k number of states at any 
given time. At the start, these states are generated 
randomly. 
The successors of these k states are computed with the 
help of objective function. 
If any of these successors is the maximum value of the 
objective function, then the algorithm stops.
Otherwise the (initial k states and k number of successors 
of the states = 2k) states are 
 placed in a pool. 
The pool is then sorted numerically. 
The highest k states are selected as 
New initial states. 
This process continues until 
a maximum value is reached.

--- Page 23 ---
Local Search 
Global maximum - a state that maximizes the objective function over the 
entire landscape. 
Local maximum - a state that maximizes the objective function in a small 
area around it. 
Plateau - a state such that the objective function is constant in an area 
around it. 
Shoulder - a plateau that has an uphill edge. 

--- Page 24 ---
Local Search 
--- Page 25 ---
Constructing  Search  Trees
Search:  Searching is a step by step procedure to solve a 
search -problem in a given search space.
Search tree:  A tree representation of search problem is 
called Search tree. The root of the search tree is the root 
node which is corresponding to the initial state .
A search problem consists of :
A State Space.  Set of all possible states where you can 
be.
A Start State.  The state from where the search begins.
A Goal Test.  A function that looks at the current state 
returns whether or not it is the goal state.
--- Page 26 ---
Constructing  Search  Trees
Create search trees to solve Artificial Intelligence 
questions. 
Use each piece of information as a node  and construct a 
hierarchy  of nodes based on how the individual pieces 
of information connect  together so that one can go 
along a path through a series of nodes in order to get 
from one to another .
The search tree will find a potential solution to 
unknown questions by looking at the available 
data in an organized manner, one piece (or 
"node") at a time.
--- Page 27 ---
Constructing  Search  Trees
Suppose one is writing a program for an airline to find a way 
for a customer to get from City A to City B given a list of all of 
the possible flights between any two cities. The program will 
need to go through the list and determine which flight (or 
connecting series of flights) that the customer should take. 
This is implemented using a search tree. 
City A (where the customer currently is located) will be the 
initial piece of information, or "initial node." The search tree 
will consist of this initial node at the top of the tree. 
Next , the program would look at all of the flights beginning 
with City A. These flights would show cities that the customer 
could reach in just one flight, and so these cities (each city a 
node itself) are on the next level, below the initial node. 
Now , each of these cities has flights as well, which would be 
on the third level, and the tree would continue so forth. 
--- Page 28 ---
Constructing  Search  Trees
Choosing a search strategy (i.e. 
Breadth -first or Depth -first) will tell the 
program how to progress down the 
search tree, or hierarchy of nodes that 
has been built from the information. 
There are clearly many different ways 
that one can get from City A to City B, 
so the search strategy is the key to 
determining which path will be selected. 
Search trees, with search strategies, can 
also be found in finding solutions in 
puzzle -solving or simple games such as 
"The Eight Queens Problem" where one 
tries to place eight queens in locations 
on a chessboard such that none of them 
can move to the space of another.

--- Page 29 ---
Stochastic  Search 
Stochastic search is one of the hill climbing search 
algorithms, that does not examine for all its 
neighbor  before moving. 
Rather , this search algorithm selects one neighbor 
node at random  and decides whether to choose  it 
as a current state or examine  another state .
Under a stochastic beam search it is possible for an 
individual  to be selected multiple times at 
random .
--- Page 30 ---
Stochastic  Search 
Stochastic pretty much means randomized  in some 
way. 
One of the major issues with beam search is that it 
tends to get stuck  into local optima instead of the 
global optimum. 
To avoid that stochastic search gives some(most 
often small) probability of the solution to choose the 
step that is not optimal at a given moment. 
--- Page 31 ---
Stochastic Beam Search 
In the Stochastic beam search instead of choosing the best k 
individuals, it selects k number of the individuals at random ; the 
individuals with a better evaluation are more likely to be chosen. 
This is done by making the probability  of being chosen as a 
function of the evaluation function.
Stochastic beam search tends to allow more diversity  in the k 
individuals than does plain beam search. 
In terms of evolution in biology, the evaluation function reflects the 
fitness of the individual; the fitter the individual, the more likely it is 
to pass that part of its variable task that is good over the next 
generation. 
Stochastic beam search is similar to asexual reproduction within 
which every individual offers slightly mutated children and then 
stochastic beam search proceeds with the survival of the fittest.
--- Page 32 ---
Mini -max Search
Mini -max algorithm is a recursive  or backtracking 
algorithm which is used in decision -making  and 
game theory . 
It provides an optimal  move  for the player 
assuming that opponent  is also playing optimally. 
Mini -Max algorithm uses recursion to search 
through the game -tree. 
Min -Max algorithm is mostly used for game playing 
in AI. Such as Chess, Checkers, tic -tac-toe, go, and 
various tow -players game. This Algorithm computes 
the minimax  decision for the current state.
--- Page 33 ---
Mini -max Search
In this algorithm two players play the game, one is called 
MAX  and other is called MIN . Both the players fight it 
as the opponent player gets the minimum benefit  while 
they get the maximum benefit. 
Both Players of the game are opponent of each other, 
where MAX  will select the maximized value and MIN will 
select the minimized  value. 
The minimax  algorithm performs a depth -first search 
algorithm for the exploration of the complete game tree. 
The minimax  algorithm proceeds all the way down to the 
terminal node of the tree, then backtrack the tree as the 
recursion. 
--- Page 34 ---
Mini -max Search: Psedo  Code
function minimax (node, depth, maximizingPlayer )is
ifdepth ==0 ornode isaterminal node then
return static evaluation ofnode
ifMaximizingPlayer then //forMaximizer Player
maxEva =-infinity
foreach child ofnode do
eva=minimax (child, depth -1,false)
maxEva =max( maxEva,eva ) //gives Maximum ofthevalues
return maxEva
else //forMinimizer player
minEva =+infinity
foreach child ofnode do
eva=minimax (child, depth -1,true)
minEva =min( minEva ,eva) //gives minimum ofthevalues
return minEva
--- Page 36 ---
Working of Mini -max Search
The working of the minimax  algorithm can be easily described 
using an example. Below we have taken an example of game -
tree which is representing the two -player game.
In this example, there are two players one is called Maximizer  
and other is called Minimizer.
Maximizer  will try to get the Maximum possible score, and 
Minimizer will try to get the minimum possible score.
This algorithm applies DFS, so in this game -tree, we have to 
go all the way through the leaves to reach the terminal nodes. 
At the terminal node, the terminal values are given so we will 
compare those value and backtrack the tree until the initial 
state occurs. Following are the main steps involved in solving 
the two -player game tree:
--- Page 37 ---
Working of Mini -max Search
Step -1: In the first step, the 
algorithm generates the 
entire game -tree and apply 
the utility function to get the 
utility values for the terminal 
states. 
In the below tree diagram, 
let's take A is the initial state 
of the tree. 
Suppose maximizer  takes 
first turn which has worst -
case initial value = - infinity, 
and minimizer will take next 
turn which has worst -case 
initial value = +infinity
--- Page 38 ---
Working of Mini -max Search
Step 2:  Now, first we find the 
utilities value for the 
Maximizer , its initial value is -
∞, so we will compare each 
value in terminal state with 
initial value of Maximizer  and 
determines the higher nodes 
values. It will find the 
maximum among the all.
For node D     max( -1,- -∞) => 
max( -1,4)= 4
For Node E     max(2, -∞) => 
max(2, 6)= 6
For Node F     max( -3, -∞) => 
max( -3,-5) = -3
For node G     max(0, -∞) = 
max(0, 7) = 7

--- Page 39 ---
Working of Mini -max Search
Step 3:  In the next step, 
it's a turn for minimizer, so 
it will compare all nodes 
value with +∞, and will 
find the 3rd layer node 
values.
For node B= min(4,6) = 4
For node C= min ( -3, 7) = 
 -3

--- Page 40 ---
Working of Mini -max Search
 Step 4: Now it's a turn for 
Maximizer , and it will 
again choose the maximum 
of all nodes value and find 
the maximum value for the 
root node. 
In this game tree, there are 
only 4 layers, hence we 
reach immediately to the 
root node, but in real 
games, there will be more 
than 4 layers.
For node A max(4, -3)= 4

--- Page 41 ---
Limitation of the Mini -max Search
The main drawback of the minimax  algorithm is that 
it gets really slow for complex games such as Chess, 
go, etc. This type of games has a huge branching 
factor, and the player has lots of choices to decide. 
This limitation of the minimax  algorithm can be 
improved from alpha -beta pruning  which we have 
discussed in the next topic. 
--- Page 42 ---
Alpha -Beta Pruning
Alpha -beta pruning is a modified version of the minimax  
algorithm. It is an optimization technique for the 
minimax  algorithm. 
As we have seen in the minimax  search algorithm that the 
number of game states it has to examine are exponential 
in depth of the tree. Since we cannot eliminate the 
exponent, but we can cut it to half. 
Hence there is a technique by which without checking 
each node of the game tree we can compute the correct 
minimax  decision, and this technique is called pruning . 
This involves two threshold parameter Alpha and beta for 
future expansion, so it is called alpha -beta pruning . It 
is also called as Alpha -Beta Algorithm .
--- Page 43 ---
Alpha -Beta Pruning
Alpha -beta pruning can be applied at any depth of a 
tree, and sometimes it not only prune the tree leaves 
but also entire sub -tree. 
The two-parameter can be defined as: Alpha:  The 
best (highest -value) choice we have found so far at 
any point along the path of Maximizer . The initial 
value of alpha is -∞. 
Beta:  The best (lowest -value) choice we have found 
so far at any point along the path of Minimizer. The 
initial value of beta is +∞.
--- Page 44 ---
Alpha -Beta Pruning
The Alpha -beta pruning to a standard minimax  
algorithm returns the same move as the standard 
algorithm does, but it removes all the nodes which 
are not really affecting the final decision but making 
algorithm slow. Hence by pruning these nodes, it 
makes the algorithm fast. 
--- Page 45 ---
Condition for Alpha -Beta Pruning
The main condition which required for alpha -beta pruning 
is:
                            α>=β
Key points about alpha -beta pruning:
The Max player will only update the value of alpha.
The Min player will only update the value of beta.
While backtracking the tree, the node values will be 
passed to upper nodes instead of values of alpha and 
beta.
We will only pass the alpha, beta values to the child 
nodes.
--- Page 46 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Let's take an example of two -
player search tree to 
understand the working of 
Alpha -beta pruning
Step 1:  At the first step the, 
Max player will start first move 
from node A where α= -∞ and 
β= +∞, these value of alpha and 
beta passed down to node B 
where again α= -∞ and β= +∞, 
and Node B passes the same 
value to its child D .
--- Page 47 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Step 2:  At Node D, the value of α will be calculated 
as its turn for Max. The value of α is compared with 
firstly 2 and then 3, and the max (2, 3) = 3 will be the 
value of α at node D and node value will also 3 .
Step 3:  Now algorithm backtrack to node B, where 
the value of β will change as this is a turn of Min, 
Now β= +∞, will compare with the available 
subsequent nodes value, i.e. min (∞, 3) = 3, hence at 
node B now α= -∞, and β= 3 .
In the next step, algorithm traverse the next 
successor of Node B which is node E, and the values 
of α= -∞, and β= 3 will also be passed.
--- Page 48 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Step 4:  At node E, 
Max will take its 
turn, and the value of 
alpha will change. 
The current value of 
alpha will be 
compared with 5, so 
max ( -∞, 5) = 5, 
hence at node E α= 5 
and β= 3, where 
α>=β, so the right 
successor of E will be 
pruned, and 
algorithm will not 
traverse it, and the 
value at node E will 
be 5.

--- Page 49 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Step 5:  At next step, 
algorithm again backtrack 
the tree, from node B to 
node A. At node A, the value 
of alpha will be changed the 
maximum available value is 
3 as max ( -∞, 3)= 3, and β= 
+∞, these two values now 
passes to right successor of 
A which is Node C.  
At node C, α=3 and β= +∞, 
and the same values will be 
passed on to node F.

--- Page 50 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Step 6:  At node F, 
again the value of α will 
be compared with left 
child which is 0, and 
max(3,0)= 3, and then 
compared with right 
child which is 1, and 
max(3,1)= 3 still α 
remains 3, but the node 
value of F will become 
1. 

--- Page 51 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Step 7:  Node F returns 
the node value 1 to node 
C, at C α= 3 and β= +∞, 
here the value of beta will 
be changed, it will 
compare with 1 so min 
(∞, 1) = 1. Now at C, α=3 
and β= 1, and again it 
satisfies the condition 
α>=β, so the next child of 
C which is G will be 
pruned, and the 
algorithm will not 
compute the entire sub -
tree G.  

--- Page 52 ---
Working of Alpha -Beta Pruning
Step 8:  C now returns 
the value of 1 to A here 
the best value for A is 
max (3, 1) = 3. 
Following is the final 
game tree which is the 
showing the nodes 
which are computed 
and nodes which has 
never computed. Hence 
the optimal value for 
the maximizer  is 3 for 
this example.  

--- Page 53 ---
Move Ordering in Alpha -Beta pruning: 
The effectiveness of alpha -beta pruning is highly dependent on the 
order in which each node is examined. Move order is an important 
aspect of alpha -beta pruning.
It can be of two types:
Worst ordering:  In some cases, alpha -beta pruning algorithm 
does not prune any of the leaves of the tree, and works exactly as 
minimax  algorithm. In this case, it also consumes more time 
because of alpha -beta factors, such a move of pruning is called 
worst ordering. In this case, the best move occurs on the right side 
of the tree. The time complexity for such an order is O( bm).
Ideal ordering:  The ideal ordering for alpha -beta pruning occurs 
when lots of pruning happens in the tree, and best moves occur at 
the left side of the tree. We apply DFS hence it first search left of the 
tree and go deep twice as minimax  algorithm in the same amount of 
time. Complexity in ideal ordering is O( bm/2).