
--- Page 1 ---
ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE
Unit -I: Introduction

--- Page 2 ---
Unit -I: Introduction
Introduction
AI problems, Agents and Environments
Structure of Agents, Problem Solving Agents
Basic Search Strategies
Problem Spaces
Uninformed Search (Breadth -First, Depth -First Search,
                                   Depth -first with Iterative Deepening), 
Heuristic Search (Hill Climbing, Generic Best -First, A *)

--- Page 3 ---
AI  Role in Mechanical Engineering
Machine learning enables  predictive 
monitoring, with machine learning algorithms 
forecasting  equipment breakdowns   in 
manufacturing units before  they occur  
and scheduling  timely maintenance .
Artificial intelligence (AI) is also being adopted 
forproduct inspection  and quality control . 
According to Forbes, automated quality testing 
done with machine learning can increase detection 
rates by up to 90%
 

--- Page 4 ---
AI  Role in Mechanical Engineering
CIM ( Computer Integrated Manufacturing 
such as (analysis, CAD, CAM, etc)) needs 
transparent communications  as different 
systems handle the same object using  different 
representations , thus requiring translation.
David (1987) discusses the requirements of an 
Intelligent CAD system, and introduces a system
   called Ciao  (Computer Intelligently Assisted 
Design).
AI Can assist  in those scenarios.
 

--- Page 6 ---
AI  Role in Mechanical Engineering

--- Page 7 ---
AI  Role in Mechanical Engineering

--- Page 8 ---
AI  Role in Mechanical Engineering
Stress Elimination in 3D Structures
•Estimating the amount of stress while 
designing and manufacturing 3D Structures
Material Evaluation for Different Services
•Evaluating materials, its Strength -durability -
quality and helping in a more exceptional 
manufacturing process

--- Page 9 ---
AI  Role in Mechanical Engineering

--- Page 10 ---
Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence  (AI)
Intelligence  is the ability to acquire, understand 
and apply  the knowledge to achieve goals in the 
world
              Acquire → Understand → Apply ➔ GOAL
On the other hand, Artificial intelligence (AI) is the 
study of how to make computers  do things which, 
at the moment, people do better
    

--- Page 11 ---
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
❖Artificial intelligence (AI) is the intelligence 
of machines and the branch of computer  
science  which aims to create intelligent  
machines.
Artificial Intelligence is concerned with the design  of 
intelligence in an artificial device . 
            The term was coined by McCarthy in 1956. 
 

--- Page 12 ---
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Artificial Intelligence is concerned with the design of 
intelligence  in an artificial device . 
             
There are two ideas in the                                            
definition. 
1. Intelligence 
2. artificial device 
 – A system with intelligence is expected  to behave  as 
intelligently as a human 
 – A system with intelligence is expected to behave in 
the best possible manner 
 

--- Page 13 ---
Definition of AI
❖Major AI textbooks define the field as
           "the study and design of intelligent agents ,“ 
    
where an 
intelligent agent 
is a system that 
perceives  its 
environment and 
takes actions  
which maximize 
its chances of 
success .
Artificial intelligence is about designing systems that
 are as intelligent as humans. 
--- Page 14 ---
What is AI?
14▪AI is the reproduction of human reasoning and  
intelligent behavior by computational methods 
Intelligent 
behavior
HumansComputeran attempt of
--- Page 15 ---
15
Act like humans Act rationally
Think like humans Think rationallyWhat is AI?
Discipline that systematizes and automates 
reasoning processes to create machines that:
--- Page 16 ---
16▪The goal of AI is to create computer systems that 
perform tasks regarded as requiring intelligence  when 
done by humans
▪→ AI Methodology: Take a task at which people are 
better, e.g.:
•Prove a theorem
•Play chess
•Plan a surgical operation
•Diagnose a disease
•Navigate in a building
 and build a computer system that does it automatically
▪But do we want to duplicate human imperfections ?Act like humans Act rationally
Think like humans Think rationally
--- Page 17 ---
AI, ML and Deep Learning

--- Page 18 ---
AI, ML and Deep Learning

--- Page 19 ---
making computers that think?
the automation of activities we associate with human thinking, 
like decision making, learning ... ?
the art of creating machines that perform functions that require 
intelligence when performed by people ?
the study of mental faculties through the use of computational 
models ?
NOTES
--- Page 20 ---
the study of computations that make it possible to 
perceive, reason and act ?
a field of study that seeks to explain and emulate 
intelligent behaviour in terms of computational processes ?
a branch of computer science that is concerned with the 
automation of intelligent behaviour ?
anything in Computing Science that we don't yet know 
how to do properly ? (!)

--- Page 21 ---
What is Artificial Intelligence ?
Systems that act
 rationallySystems that think
 like humansSystems that think
 rationally
Systems that act
 like humansTHOUGHT
BEHAVIOUR
HUMAN RATIONAL
--- Page 22 ---
Turing Test : 
          Systems that act like humans
“The art of creating machines  that perform 
functions  that require intelligence  when performed 
by people .” (Kurzweil)
“The study of how to make computers  do things at 
which, at the moment, people are better.” (Rich and 
Knight)
--- Page 23 ---
Systems that act like humans
You enter a room which has a computer terminal. You 
have a fixed period of time to type what you want into 
the terminal, and study  the replies . At the other end of 
the line is either  a human  being or a computer system . 
If it is a computer system, and at the end of the period 
you cannot reliably determine whether it is a system or 
a human, then the system is deemed  to be intelligent .   
?
--- Page 25 ---
Includes two more issues:
◦ Computer vision  
to perceive objects (seeing)
◦ Robotics  
to move objects (acting)

--- Page 26 ---
The Turing Test approach 
◦a human questioner cannot tell if
 there is a computer or a human answering his question, via 
teletype (remote communication)
◦The computer must behave intelligently
Intelligent behavior 
◦to achieve human -level performance in all cognitive tasks 

--- Page 27 ---
These cognitive tasks include:
◦ Natural language processing  
for communication with human
◦ Knowledge representation  
to store information effectively & efficiently
◦ Automated reasoning  
to retrieve & answer questions using the 
stored information
◦Machine learning
 to adapt to new circumstances

--- Page 28 ---
While studying the typical  range of tasks  
that we might expect  an “ intelligent entity ” 
to perform, we need to consider both 
“common -place/ Mundane /routine tasks as 
well as expert  tasks. 
Mundane tasks:  (daily use tasks)
◦Planning route , activity
◦Recognizing people , objects  (vision, speech)
◦Communicating  (through natural language)
◦Navigating  around obstacles on the street .

--- Page 29 ---
Expert Tasks
◦Medical diagnosis
◦Mathematical problem solving
◦Playing games like chess 
-Easy /Hard Problems: It has been easier to 
mechanize many of the high level tasks (expert). 
We usually associate with the intelligence in 
people, in history we don’t have same amount of 
success with mundane tasks.

--- Page 31 ---
AI  Problems

--- Page 32 ---
AI problems (cont..)
AI Systems can easily do 
Symbolic integration  
Proving theorems
Playing chess
Medical Diagnosis
It has been very hard  to mechanize tasks that lot of 
animals do
Walking around without running into things
Catching Prey and avoiding predators
Interpreting complex sensory information
Modeling the internal states of other animals from 
their behavior.
(lists , hierarchies, or networks)
--- Page 33 ---
AI problems (cont..)
Processing

--- Page 34 ---
AI problems (cont..)
Humans  have learned mundane (ordinary) 
tasks since their birth . 
They learn by perception, speaking , using 
language , and locomotives . 
They learn Formal Tasks and Expert Tasks 
later , in that order. 
For humans, the mundane tasks are easiest to 
learn. The same  was considered true before 
trying to implement mundane tasks in 
machines .

--- Page 35 ---
AI problems (cont..)
Earlier, all work of AI was concentrated in the 
mundane  task domain.
Later, it turned out that the machine  requires 
more knowledge , complex  knowledge 
representation, and complicated algorithms for 
handling mundane tasks. 
This is the reason why AI work is more 
prospering in the Expert Tasks domain now, as 
the expert task domain needs expert 
knowledge without common sense, which can 
be easier to represent and handle .

--- Page 36 ---
FYI on AI
Limits of AI Today 
Today’s successful AI systems operate in well -defined domains and employ 
narrow, specialized knowledge. 
Common sense knowledge is needed to function in complex, open -ended 
worlds. Such a system also needs to understand unconstrained natural 
language. However these capabilities are not yet fully present in today’s 
intelligent systems. 
What can AI systems do 
Today’s AI systems have been able to achieve limited success in some of these 
tasks. 
• In Computer vision, the systems are capable of face recognition 
• In Robotics, we have been able to make vehicles that are mostly autonomous. 
• In Natural language processing, we have systems that are capable of simple 
machine translation. 
• Today’s Expert systems can carry out medical diagnosis in a narrow domain 
• Speech understanding systems are capable of recognizing several thousand 
words continuous speech 

--- Page 37 ---
FYI on AI
Planning and scheduling systems had been employed in scheduling 
experiments with the Hubble Telescope. 
The Learning systems are capable of doing text categorization into about a 
1000 topics 
In Games, AI systems can play at the Grand Master level in chess (world 
champion), checkers, etc. 
What can AI systems NOT do yet? 
• Understand natural language robustly (e.g., read and understand articles in a 
newspaper) 
• Surf the web 
• Interpret an arbitrary visual scene 
• Learn a natural language 
• Construct plans in dynamic real -time domains 
• Exhibit true autonomy and intelligence 

--- Page 39 ---
AI to analyze satellite images to identify which areas have the highest 
poverty levels
New Artificial Intelligence now predicts the time it takes for a crop like 
a tomato to be ripe and ready for picking thus increasing the efficiency 
of farming.
AI researchers have created many tools in AI laboratories to solve the 
most difficult problems in computer science. Thus include computer 
mouse, GUIs, Automatic storage management..etc.
Computer -aided interpretation of medical images : A typical application 
is detection of the tumor.
Artificial Intelligence have been combined with many sensor 
technologies which enables many applications such as at home water 
quality monitoring.
Chat bots in Food order Apps.

--- Page 40 ---
An AI system can be defined as the study of 
the rational agent and its environment. 
The agents  sense the environment  through 
sensors and act on their environment through 
actuators . 
An AI agent can have mental properties such 
as knowledge, belief, intention, etc.
No Emotions and only
Math based
--- Page 41 ---
Agents & Environments in AI
An AI system can be defined as the study of the 
rational agent and its environment . 
The agents  sense the environment  through sensors 
and act on their environment through actuators. 
An AI agent can have mental properties such as 
knowledge, belief, intention, etc.
No Emotions and only
Math based
A rational agent 
 - is said to perform the right things
- which has clear preference, models uncertainty, and 
acts in a way to maximize its performance measure with all possible actions
--- Page 42 ---
An agent can be anything that perceive its environment 
through sensors and act upon that environment 
through actuators. 
An Agent runs in the cycle of perceiving , thinking , and 
acting . 

--- Page 43 ---
Agent: An agent  is anything that can perceive its 
environment through sensors  and acts upon that 
environment through effectors . 
Environment: An environment is the surroundings or 
conditions in which an agents lives or operates.
Action: An action is operation involving the 
effectors.( Actuator).

--- Page 44 ---
An agent perceives  its environment through sensors . 
The complete set of inputs  at a given time is called a 
percept . 
The current  percept, or a sequence of percepts can 
influence the actions  of an agent. 
The agent can change  the environment through 
actuators or effectors. 
An operation involving an effector  is called an action . 
Actions can be grouped  into action sequences . 
The agent can have goals  which it tries to achieve. 
Thus, an agent can be looked upon as a system that 
implements a mapping from percept sequences to 
actions. 

--- Page 45 ---
What is AI Agent?
•An agent can be anything that perceive its 
environment through sensors  and act upon that 
environment through actuators . 
•An Agent runs in the cycle of perceiving , thinking , 
and acting . An agent can be:
•Human -Agent:  A human agent has eyes, ears , and 
other organs  which work for sensors and hand, legs, 
vocal tract work for actuators.
•Robotic Agent:  A robotic agent can have cameras , 
infrared range finder, Natural Lang. processor (NLP) 
for sensors  and various motors for actuators .
•Software Agent:  Software agent can have 
keystrokes, file contents as sensory input and act on 
those inputs and display output on the screen.

--- Page 46 ---
A human agent has :
◦Sensors: eyes, ears, and other organs.
◦Actuator: hands, legs, mouth, and other body 
part.
A robotic agent might have:
◦Sensors: Cameras,..
◦Actuator: motors
A Software Agent
◦Sensors: ?
◦Actuator: ?
The agent function 
maps from percepts histories to actions
  F: P→ A

--- Page 47 ---
There are two locations: squares A and B. 
The vacuum agent perceives  which square it 
is in and whether there is dirt in the square. 
It can choose to move  left, move right, suck 
up the dirt, or do nothing. 
One very simple agent function is the 
following: if the current square  is dirty, then 
suck, otherwise move  to the other square. 
A partial tabulation of this agent function is 
shown in  below Figure

--- Page 48 ---
•Agent : vacuum cleaner
•Environment : Front room
•Percept : See dirt ( Eye of the vacuum cleaner)
•Action : Suck the dirt (Attached components of vacuum 
cleaner
•Change in the Environment : Front room is clean

--- Page 50 ---
Example: Vacuum Cleaner Agent
Agent: robot  vacuum cleaner
Environment: floors of your apartment
Sensors:
dirt sensor: detects when floor in front of robot is dirty
bump sensor: detects when it has bumped into something
power sensor: measures amount of power in battery
bag sensor: amount of space remaining in dirt bag
Effectors:
motorized wheels
suction motor
plug into wall?  empty dirt bag?
Percepts:  “Floor is dirty”
Actions: “Forward, 0.5 ft/sec”

--- Page 53 ---
The job of AI is to design an agent program 
that implements  the agent function —
     (ie., the mapping from percepts to → actions)
We assume this program will run on some sort 
of ARCHITECTURE  computing device with 
physical sensors  and actuators —we call this 
the architecture:
       agent = architecture + program 

--- Page 55 ---
Structure of AI Agents
Following are the main three terms involved in the 
structure of an AI agent: 
•Architecture:   Architecture is machinery  that an 
AI agent  executes on.
•Agent Function: Agent function  is used to map  a 
percept  (P*) to an action  (A). 
                   f : P* →A
•Agent program:    Agent program  is an   
                              implementation  of agent function . 
•An agent program executes on the physical  
architecture  to produce function f.

--- Page 56 ---
Structure of AI Agents
• Obviously, the program we choose has to be one 
that is appropriate for the architecture. 
•If the program is going to recommend actions like 
Walk , the architecture had better have legs. 
•The architecture might be just an ordinary PC, or 
it might be a robotic car with several onboard 
computers, cameras , and other sensors . 
•In general, the architecture makes the percepts  
from the sensors  available to the program, runs 
the program, and feeds the program’s action 
choices to the actuators  as they are generated.

--- Page 57 ---
Types of  AI Agents 
Types of  AI Agent Agent Working Process
State -based Agent or 
model -based 
reflex agent ✓information comes from sensors - percepts 
✓based on this, the agent changes the current state of the 
world 
✓based on state of the world and knowledge (memory), 
it triggers actions through the effectors 
Goal -based Agent See Next Slide
Utility -based Agent Utility based agents provides a more general agent framework. 
In case that the agent has multiple goals, this framework can 
accommodate different preferences for the different goals. 
Such systems are characterized by a utility function that maps 
a state or a sequence of states to a real valued utility. The agent 
acts so as to maximize expected utility 
Simple reflex agents Select actions on the basis of current percept only
Condition -action rule: if car -in-front -is-braking then 
initiate -braking 
Learning Agent Learning allows an agent to operate in initially unknown  
environments. The learning element modifies the performance 
element. Learning is required for true autonomy. 
--- Page 58 ---
Goal -Based   Agent 
State -based Agent or model -based reflex agent 
    which base their actions on a direct mapping from 
states to actions . 
Such agents cannot operate well in environments for 
which this mapping would be too large to store and 
would take too long to learn. 
Goal -based agents, on the other hand, consider 
future actions and the desirability  of their 
outcomes .
--- Page 59 ---
Goal -Based   Agent 
In some cases, just 
knowing  the information 
is not sufficient. 
The intent is to reduce  
distance from the goal , 
i.e., desired situations. 
Knowledge about the goal  
is an important factor . 
They are used to expand 
the capabilities based  on 
the goal  information.  

--- Page 60 ---
Goal -Based   Agent 
The goal based agent has some goal which forms a basis  
of its actions . Such agents work as follows: 
information comes from sensors - percepts 
changes the agents current state of the world 
based on state of the world and knowledge 
(memory) and goals/intentions, it chooses actions 
and does them through the  effectors. 
Goal formulation based on the current situation is a way 
of solving many problems and search  is a universal 
problem solving mechanism in AI. 
The sequence  of steps required to solve a problem is not 
known a priori (from the former)  and must be determined 
by a systematic exploration of the alternatives . 
--- Page 61 ---
Problem -Solving  Agents
In Artificial Intelligence, Search techniques are 
universal problem -solving methods. 
Rational agents  (one that does the right thing)  or 
Problem -solving agents  in AI mostly used these 
search strategies or algorithms to solve a specific 
problem and provide the best result . 
Problem -solving agents are the goal -based agents 
and use atomic representation (each state of the world 
is a black box that has no internal structure). 
--- Page 62 ---
Problem -Solving  Agent

--- Page 63 ---
Problem -Solving  Agent

--- Page 64 ---
Problem Solving Agent
A Problem Solving has a GOAL
Then the Agent  Calls a Search  procedure  to solve 
it
Problem Solving is a kind of Goal -based Agent 
that decides What to do by finding the sequences  
of Actions  that lead to desirable states
An Intelligent Agent case, a Knowledge Base ( KB) 
corresponds to the environment  operators  
correspond to sensors  and the search techniques 
are the Actuators
--- Page 65 ---
Problem -Solving  Agent
Steps Performed  by 
Problem Solving AgentExplanation
Goal Formulation It organizes the steps/sequence  required to formulate  
one goal  out of multiple goals as well as actions to 
achieve that goal. 
Goal formulation is based on the current situation and 
the agent’s performance measure.
Problem Formulation It is the most important step of problem -solving which 
decides what actions  should be taken to  achieve  the 
formulated goal.  
Search It identifies all the best possible sequence of actions to 
reach the goal state from the current state. It takes a 
problem as an input and returns solution as its output.
Solution It finds the best algorithm out of various algorithms, 
which may be proven as the best optimal solution.
Execution It executes the best optimal solution from the searching 
algorithms to reach the goal state from the current state.
--- Page 66 ---
Problem Formulation
This decides what actions should be taken to achieve the formulated goal. 
There are following five  components involved in problem formulation:
1. Initial State:  It is the starting state or initial step of the agent 
towards its goal.
2. Actions:  It is the description of the possible actions available to 
the agent.
3. Transition Model:  It describes what each action does .
4. Goal Test:  It determines if the given state is a goal state.
5. Path cost:  It assigns a numeric cost to each path that follows the 
goal. The problem -solving agent selects a cost function , which 
reflects its performance measure. 
    Remember, an optimal  solution has the lowest path cost among all 
the solutions.
--- Page 67 ---
Example:  8 puzzle 

--- Page 68 ---
Example:  8 puzzle 

--- Page 69 ---
Example:  8 puzzle 
The problem formulation is as follows:
States:  It describes the location of each numbered tiles 
and the blank tile.
Initial State:  We can start from any state as the initial 
state.
Actions:  Here, actions of the blank space is defined, i.e., 
either left, right, up or down
Transition Model:  It returns the resulting state as per 
the given state and actions.
Goal test:  It identifies whether we have reached the 
correct goal -state.
Path cost:  The path cost is the number of steps in the 
path where the cost of each step is 1.
--- Page 70 ---
Search Algorithm Technologies
Problem -solving agents  in AI mostly used these 
search strategies or algorithms to solve a specific 
problem and provide the best result. 
Search:  Searching is a step by step procedure to solve 
a search -problem in a given search space. 
A search problem can have three main factors: 
❖Search Space:  Search space represents a set of possible 
solutions , which a system may have.
❖Start State:  It is a state from where agent begins the search .
❖Goal test:  It is a function which observe the current state and 
returns whether the goal state is achieved or not.
--- Page 71 ---
Search Algorithm Technologies
❖ State Space:  A state space 
represents a problem in terms of states  
and operators  that change states 
❖Start State:  It is a state from where 
agent begins the search .
❖Goal test:  It is a function which 
observe the current state and returns 
whether the goal state is achieved or 
not.
Search tree:  A tree representation of 
search problem is called Search tree. The 
root of the search tree is the root node 
which is corresponding to the initial state.

--- Page 72 ---
Search Algorithm Technologies
Actions:  It gives the description of all the available 
actions to the agent.
Transition model:  A description of what each 
action do, can be represented as a transition model.
Path Cost:  It is a function which assigns a numeric 
cost to each path.
Solution:  It is an action sequence which leads from 
the start node to the goal node.
Optimal Solution:  If a solution has the lowest cost 
among all solutions.
--- Page 73 ---
Types of search algorithms
Based on the search problems we can classify the 
search algorithms into uninformed (Blind search) 
search and informed search (Heuristic search) 
algorithms. 

--- Page 74 ---
Problem Space
The problem space may 
contain one or more solutions. 
A solution is a combination  
of operations and objects that 
achieve the goals.
A problem space 
encompasses  all valid states 
that can be generated by the 
application  of any 
combination  of operators on 
any combination of objects .Problem solving is a 
process of 
generating solutions 
from observed data .
A ‘problem’ is 
characterized by 
  • a set of goals ,
  • a set of objects , 
 • a set of 
 operations
--- Page 75 ---
Uninformed/Blind Search
The uninformed search does not contain any 
domain knowledge such as closeness, the location 
of the goal. 
It operates in a brute -force  way as it only includes 
information about how to traverse the tree and how 
to identify leaf and goal nodes. 
Uninformed search applies a way in which search tree 
is searched without  any information  about 
the search space like initial state operators and 
test for the goal, so it is also called blind search .
It examines each node  of the tree until it 
achieves the goal  node.

--- Page 76 ---
Informed  Search
The Informed Search  (or Heuristic Search) is 
searching with “information” about the goal node. 
For example, in the A* search algorithm, first, we 
gather information about the goal node such as its 
location in cartesian  coordinate form and then we 
write a function that can guide our node traversal, for 
example, finding its Euclidean distance, also this 
function is called Heuristic Function. 
The heuristic function will guide  our node 
traversal by stating the distance  left from each 
node to the goal node. 
You can also think of Informed Search Strategy as a 
Guided Search Strategy.
--- Page 77 ---
Informed  Search
Informed search algorithms use domain knowledge. In an 
informed search, problem information is available which 
can guide the search. Informed search strategies can find a 
solution more efficiently than an uninformed search 
strategy. Informed search is also called a Heuristic search.
A heuristic is a way which might not always be guaranteed 
for best solutions but guaranteed to find a good solution in 
reasonable time.
Informed search can solve much complex problem which 
could not be solved in another way.
An example of informed search algorithms is a traveling 
salesman problem.
Greedy Search
A* Search
--- Page 78 ---
Blind Search:  Breadth -first Search
Breadth -first search is the most common search 
strategy for traversing a tree or graph. 
This algorithm searches breadthwise  in a tree or 
graph, so it is called breadth -first search.
BFS algorithm starts searching from the root node 
of the tree and expands  all successor node at the 
current level before moving to nodes of next level.
The breadth -first search algorithm is an example of a 
general -graph search algorithm. 
Breadth -first search implemented using FIFO (First -
In-First -Out) queue data structure.
--- Page 79 ---
Breadth -first Search

--- Page 80 ---
Breadth -first Search

--- Page 81 ---
Breadth -first Search
Example: 
In the below tree structure, we have shown the 
traversing of the tree using BFS algorithm from the 
root node S to goal node K. 
BFS search algorithm traverse in layers, so it will 
follow the path which is shown by the dotted arrow, 
and the traversed path will be :
S--->A-->B--->C-->D--->G-->H-->E-->F-->I---->K
--- Page 82 ---
Breadth -first Search
S--->A-->B--->C-->D--->G-->H-->E-->F-->I---->K

--- Page 83 ---
Depth -first Search
Depth -first search is a recursive  algorithm for 
traversing a tree or graph data structure.
It is called the depth -first search because it starts from 
the root node and follows each path to its greatest 
depth node before moving to the next path.
DFS uses a stack data structure for its 
implementation.
The process of the DFS algorithm is similar to the BFS 
algorithm.
Stack: Consider an example of plates stacked over one another in the canteen. 
The plate  which is at the top is the first one to be removed, i.e. the plate which 
has been placed at the bottommost position remains in the stack for the longest 
period of time. So, it can be simply seen to follow LIFO(Last In First Out )/
FILO(First In Last Out) order.

--- Page 84 ---
Depth -first Search

--- Page 85 ---
Depth -first Search: Example
In the below search tree, we have shown the flow of 
depth -first search, and it will follow the order as:
           Root node --->Left node ----> right node .
It will start searching from root node S, and traverse 
A, then B, then D and E, after traversing E, it will 
backtrack the tree as E has no other successor and 
still goal node is not found. 
After backtracking it will traverse node C and then 
G, and here it will terminate as it found goal node.
--- Page 86 ---
Depth -first Search: Example

--- Page 87 ---
Depth -first with Iterative Deepening
The iterative deepening algorithm is a combination  of 
BFS  and DFS  algorithms. 
This search algorithm finds out the best depth limit 
and does it by gradually increasing  the limit  until a 
goal  is found .
This algorithm performs depth -first  search up to a 
certain "depth limit ", and it keeps increasing  the depth 
limit after each iteration until the goal node is found.
This Search algorithm combines the benefits of 
Breadth -first  search's fast search and depth -first 
search's memory efficiency.
The iterative search algorithm is useful uninformed 
search when search space is large, and depth of goal node 
is unknown.
--- Page 88 ---
Depth -first with Iterative Deepening 
(DFIDS): Example
Following tree structure is showing the iterative 
deepening depth -first search (DFIDS ). 
DFIDS algorithm performs various iterations 
until it does not find the goal node. The iteration 
performed by the  algorithm is given as :
1'st Iteration ----- > A 
2'nd Iteration ----> A, B, C
3'rd Iteration ------ >A, B, D, 
 E, C, F, G
4'th Iteration ------ >A, B, D, H, 
I, E, C, F, K, G
In the fourth iteration, the 
algorithm will find the goal 
node .
--- Page 90 ---
Informed / Heuristic  Search
Informed search algorithm contains an array of 
knowledge such as how far we are from the goal , 
path cost , how to reach  to goal node, etc. 
This knowledge help agents to explore less to the 
search space and find more efficiently  the goal 
node .
The informed search algorithm is more useful for 
large search space . 
Informed search algorithm uses the idea of heuristic, 
so it is also called Heuristic search.
Heuristic:  Find or Discover
--- Page 91 ---
Informed / Heuristic  Search

--- Page 92 ---
Hill Climbing
Hill Climbing is a form of heuristic search algorithm 
which is used in solving optimization  related problems 
in AI domain. 
Searching for a goal state = Climbing to the top of a hill
  - Generate -and -test + direction to move .
  - Heuristic function to estimate how close a given 
 state is to a goal state.  
Generate -and-Test Algorithm 
    1. Generate a possible solution. 
    2. Test to see if this is actually a solution. 
    3. Quit if a solution has been found. Otherwise, return to     
        step 1. 
--- Page 93 ---
Hill Climbing
The algorithm starts with a non -optimal  state and 
iteratively  improves its state until  some 
predefined condition  is met. 
The condition to be met is based on the heuristic  
function . (Heuristic function estimates  how 
close  a state is to the goal ). 
The aim of the algorithm is to reach an optimal 
state which is better  than its current  state. 
The starting point which is the non -optimal state is 
referred to as the base  of the hill and it tries to 
constantly iterate ( climb ) untill  it reaches the peak 
value, that is why it is called Hill Climbing Algorithm
--- Page 94 ---
Hill Climbing

--- Page 95 ---
Hill Climbing

--- Page 96 ---
Hill Climbing
Hill climbing algorithm is a local search algorithm 
which continuously moves in the direction of 
increasing elevation /value to find the peak  of the 
mountain or best solution to the problem. 
It terminates  when it reaches a peak  value where 
no neighbor has a higher value. 
Hill climbing algorithm is a technique which is used 
for optimizing  the mathematical  problems. 
One of the widely discussed examples of Hill climbing 
algorithm is Traveling -salesman  Problem in which 
we need to minimize the distance traveled by the 
salesman.
--- Page 97 ---
Hill Climbing
It is also called greedy local search as it only looks 
to its good immediate  neighbor state and not 
beyond that .
 A node of hill climbing algorithm has two 
components which are state  and value . 
In this algorithm, we don't  need to maintain and 
handle the search tree or graph as it only keeps a 
single current state.
--- Page 98 ---
HC: Different regions in the state space 
landscape
Local Maximum:  Local maximum is a state which is 
better than its neighbor states , but there is also another 
state which is higher than it.
Global Maximum:  Global maximum is the best 
possible state of state space landscape . It has the 
highest value of objective function.
Current state:  It is a state in a landscape diagram where 
an agent is currently present.
Flat local maximum:  It is a flat space in the landscape 
where all the neighbor states of current states have the 
same value .
Shoulder:  It is a plateau  region which has an uphill 
edge.
--- Page 99 ---
Features of Hill Climbing
Following are some main features of Hill Climbing 
Algorithm:
Generate and Test variant:  Hill Climbing is the 
variant of Generate and Test method. The Generate 
and Test method produce feedback  which helps to 
decide  which direction  to move in the search 
space.
Greedy approach:  Hill-climbing algorithm search 
moves in the direction  which optimizes  the cost.
No backtracking:  It does not backtrack the search 
space, as it does not remember the previous states.
--- Page 100 ---
Heuristics Function …h(n)
 Heuristic is a function which is used in Informed Search, and 
it finds the most promising path . 
It takes the current state of the agent as its input and 
produces the estimation of how close agent is from the goal. 
The heuristic method, however, might not always give the best 
solution, but it guaranteed  to find a good  solution  in 
reasonable time .
 Heuristic function estimates  how close  a state is to the 
goal . It is represented by h(n) , and it calculates the cost of an 
optimal path between the pair of states. 
The value of the heuristic function is always positive .
               h(n)<=h*(n)
Here h(n) is heuristic cost, and h*(n) is the estimated cost. 
Hence heuristic cost should be less than or equal to the 
estimated cost.
--- Page 101 ---
Best -First Search
Greedy best -first search algorithm always selects the 
path  which appears best  at that moment . 
It is the combination  of depth -first search and 
breadth -first search algorithms. 
It uses the heuristic function  and search . 
Best -first search allows us to take the advantages of 
both algorithms. 
With the help of best -first search, at each step, we 
can choose the most promising node. 
--- Page 102 ---
Best -First Search
In the best first search algorithm, we expand the 
node which is closest to the goal node and the closest 
cost is estimated by heuristic function, i.e .
                    f(n)=h(n)
Where , h(n)= estimated cost from node n to the goal.
--- Page 103 ---
Generic Best -First  Search
Step 1:  Place the starting node into the OPEN list.
Step 2:  If the OPEN list is empty, Stop and return failure.
Step 3:  Remove the node n, from the OPEN list which has the 
lowest value of h(n), and places it in the CLOSED list.
Step 4:  Expand the node n, and generate the successors of 
node n.
Step 5:  Check each successor of node n, and find whether any 
node is a goal node or not. If any successor node is goal node, 
then return success and terminate the search, else proceed to 
Step 6.
Step 6:  For each successor node, algorithm checks for 
evaluation function f(n), and then check if the node has been 
in either OPEN or CLOSED list. If the node has not been in 
both list, then add it to the OPEN list.
Step 7:  Return to Step 2 .
--- Page 104 ---
Generic Best -First  Search
Consider the below search problem, and we will 
traverse it using greedy best -first search. At each 
iteration, each node is expanded using evaluation 
function f(n)=h(n) , 
 which is given in 
 the table.

--- Page 105 ---
Generic Best -First  Search
 In this search example, 
we are using two lists 
which are OPEN  and 
CLOSED  Lists. 
Following are the 
iteration for traversing 
the above example.

--- Page 106 ---
Generic Best -First  Search
Expand the nodes of S and put in the 
CLOSED list
Initialization:  Open [A, B], Closed [S]
Iteration 1:  Open [A], Closed [S, B]
Iteration 2:  Open [E, F, A], Closed [S, B]
               : Open [E, A], Closed [S, B, F]
Iteration 3:  Open [I, G, E, A], Closed [S, B, F]
         : Open [I, E, A], Closed [S, B, F, G]
Hence the final solution path will be: 
                            S----> B----->F----> G
--- Page 107 ---
A* Search
A* search is the most commonly known form of best -
first search. It uses heuristic function h(n), and cost 
to reach the node n from the start state g(n). 
It has combined features of UCS and greedy best -
first search, by which it solve the problem efficiently. 
A* search algorithm finds the shortest path through 
the search space using the heuristic function . 
This search algorithm expands less search tree and 
provides optimal result faster. A* algorithm is 
similar to UCS except that it uses g(n)+h(n) instead 
of g(n).
--- Page 108 ---
A* Search
A* search algorithm finds the shortest path 
through the search space using the heuristic 
function. 
This search algorithm expands less search tree and 
provides optimal result faster. 
In A* search algorithm, we use search heuristic  as 
well as the cost  to reach the node. 
Hence we can combine both costs as following, and 
this sum is called as a fitness number .
--- Page 109 ---
A* Search
In A* search algorithm, we use search heuristic as 
well as the cost to reach the node. Hence we can 
combine both costs as following, and this sum is 
called as a fitness number [ f(n) ].
A* algorithm uses g(n)+h(n) unlike use of g(n) in 
other search algorithms.
Used mainly in 
Games and Web -
Based Maps
--- Page 110 ---
Algorithm of A* Search
Step1 : Place the starting node in the OPEN list.
Step 2:  Check if the OPEN list is empty or not, if the list is 
empty then return failure and stops.
Step 3:  Select the node from the OPEN list which has the 
smallest value of evaluation function ( g+h), if node n is goal 
node then return success and stop, otherwise
Step 4:  Expand node n and generate all of its successors, and 
put n into the closed list. For each successor n', check whether 
n' is already in the OPEN or CLOSED list, if not then compute 
evaluation function for n' and place into Open list.
Step 5:  Else if node n' is already in OPEN and CLOSED, then 
it should be attached to the back pointer which reflects the 
lowest g(n') value.
Step 6:  Return to Step 2 .
--- Page 111 ---
A* Search: Example
In this example, we will traverse the given graph 
using the A* algorithm. The heuristic value of all 
states is given in the below table so we will calculate 
the f(n) of each state using the formula of fitness 
number
 f(n)= g(n) + h(n )
 where g(n) is the cost to reach any node from 
 start state
         h(n) is the cost to reach from node n to goal node
Here we will use OPEN and CLOSED list.
--- Page 112 ---
A* Search: Example
 use f(n)= g(n) + h(n )
Initialization:  {(S, 5 )}
     S => 0 + 5 = 5
Iteration1:  
 S--> A => 1+3= 4
 S-->G => 10+0= 10
Iteration2:  
 S--> A-->C => 
 1+1+ 2 = 4 
 S--> A-->B => 
 1+2+4 = 7
 

--- Page 113 ---
A* Search: Example
Iteration3 : 
   S--> A-->C--->G  =>
 1+1+4+0 =6
 S--> A-->C--->D =>
 1+1+3+6= 11
 
Iteration 4  will give 
the final result, as S---
>A--->C--->G it 
provides the optimal 
path with cost 6. 

--- Page 114 ---
References  
https ://www.javatpoint.com/artificial -intelligence -
tutorial
https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=PzEWHH2v3T
E
Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach
               by   Stuart Russell  and Peter Norvig
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/figures.pdf
                                          END